Enel Green Power Producing clean energy with renewable sources

Enel Global Energy and Commodity Management Mitigating commodity trading risks at global scale

Enel Open Innovability® A global ecosystem that leverages Innovability® to power the future

Enel Global Procurement We maximize value creation through our relationships with suppliers

Enel Foundation Knowledge platform for a clean energy world

Enel Cuore We support the initiatives undertaken by NPOs

Ethical Channel Providing ways to report violation of our policies

Stories A hidden and valuable resource, for Italy and the world

Corporate A hidden and valuable resource, for Italy and the world

A hidden and valuable resource, for Italy and the world

The use of geothermal energy is an entirely Italian discovery that has mainly developed over the last 110 years in Tuscany. It’s a model of research, innovation and sustainability that we have also exported to other countries.

Clean, renewable geothermal energy has a long history in Italy. Larderello, in Tuscany, was the pioneering center of geothermal development, with its first industrial use in 1818. This was thanks to the French engineer and entrepreneur François Jacques de Larderel, after whom the place was later named. Larderello produced its first electricity in 1904, when Piero Ginori Conti turned on the first five geothermal-powered light bulbs. Thus, in 1913, the world's first geothermal power plant came to life and, thanks to these resources, together with engineering skill and vision, Italy has established its leadership in this field.

Enel inherited Tuscany's geothermal sites in 1962 and proceeded to develop them by investing in innovative and sustainable technologies. The Valle Secolo power plant, which has been in operation since 1991, is a good example of integration with the environment, as well as technological innovation. This is thanks to continuous improvements such as the installation of AMIS filters, which remove unwanted gases from geothermal fluids, getting rid of the typical odor of thermal areas, and the adoption of hybrid cooling technologies, which enable water recovery.

Today, through Enel Green Power, our Group operates the largest geothermal complex in Europe, with 34 power plants in Tuscany, specifically in the provinces of Pisa, Siena and Grosseto: with 6 TWh of energy, these plants meet 34% of the region's electricity needs. The complex is a model of research, innovation and sustainability, in addition to supporting tourism and local agribusiness.

Meanwhile, we have exported geothermal technology to other countries. 2017 saw the inauguration of the Cerro Pabellón power plant in Chile, the first in South America and the plant with the highest altitude in the world. It combines geothermal, solar, wind and energy storage, and provides electricity 24 hours a day, even in extreme weather conditions.

Continuous improvement

Sustainable Development Goals

Letter to Stakeholders