News & Events News & Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources

Video Series on NASA+

Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia

International Space Station

NASA Orbiter Shines New Light on Long-Running Martian Mystery

CHAPEA Crew Begins Stay Inside NASA’s Mars Habitat for Second Mission

NASA, NOAA Rank 2025 Ozone Hole as 5th Smallest Since 1992

Search All NASA Missions

A to Z List of Missions

Upcoming Launches and Landings

Spaceships and Rockets

Communicating with Missions

James Webb Space Telescope

Hubble Space Telescope

International Space Station

Spaceships and Rockets

Explore Earth Science

Earth Science in Action

Earth Science Researchers

Pluto & Dwarf Planets

Asteroids, Comets & Meteors

The Search for Life in the Universe

Astrophysics & Space Science

The Sun & Heliophysics

Biological & Physical Sciences

Human Space Travel Research

Air Traffic Solutions

Technology Transfer & Spinoffs

Space Travel Technology

Technology Living in Space

Manufacturing and Materials

For Kids and Students

For Colleges and Universities

Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers

STEM Engagement at NASA

Centers and Facilities

Doing Business with NASA

Video Series on NASA+

NASA’s Roman Observatory Passes Spate of Key Tests

Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’

Europa Clipper Captures Uranus With Star Tracker Camera

CHAPEA Crew Begins Stay Inside NASA’s Mars Habitat for Second Mission

NASA’s 2025 Astronaut Candidates: Shaping Artemis Exploration

The Overview Effect: Astronaut Perspectives from 25 Years in Low Earth Orbit

NASA, NOAA Rank 2025 Ozone Hole as 5th Smallest Since 1992

NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions

NASA Orbiter Shines New Light on Long-Running Martian Mystery

Amendment 24: F.10 Payloads and Research Investigations on the Surface of the Moon (PRISM) Due Dates Reset and Other Changes.

What’s Up: November 2025 Skywatching Tips from NASA

Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’

Corrections to F.3 Exoplanets Research

NASA’s TESS Spacecraft Triples Size of Pleiades Star Cluster

PLANETS Units Have Landed – Free NASA-Funded Out-of-School Time Resources

Amendment 26: D.2 Astrophysics Data Analysis Final Text and Due Dates Released

NASA & GLOBE Connect People, Land, and Space

NASA’s X-59 Completes First Flight, Prepares for More Flight Testing

NASA Flights Study Cosmic Ray Effects for Air, Future Space Travelers

NASA, Partners Push Forward with Remotely Piloted Airspace Integration

Amendment 24: F.10 Payloads and Research Investigations on the Surface of the Moon (PRISM) Due Dates Reset and Other Changes.

NASA, Industry Weave Data Fabric with Artificial Intelligence

NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions

New Citizen Science Proposals Funded in 2025

The Overview Effect: Astronaut Perspectives from 25 Years in Low Earth Orbit

Pódcast en español de la NASA estrena su tercera temporada

Las carreras en la NASA despegan con las pasantías

El X-59 de la NASA completa las pruebas electromagnéticas

Mars ExplorationOverviewRover BasicsMars Exploration Science GoalsMission Timeline Summary

Mars Exploration Science Goals

Mission Timeline Summary

Mars MissionsMars Sample ReturnMars Perseverance RoverMars Curiosity RoverMAVENMars Reconnaissance OrbiterMars OdysseyMars Relay NetworkMore Mars Missions

Mars Perseverance Rover

Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter

MultimediaImagesVideoAudioMore Resources

News & FeaturesLatest Mars ArticlesThe Mars ReportNewsletter Home

Mars – the fourth planet from the Sun – is a dusty, cold, desert world with a very thin atmosphere. This dynamic planet has seasons, polar ice caps, extinct volcanoes, canyons and weather.

Mars is one of the most explored bodies in our solar system, and it's the only planet where we've sent rovers to roam the alien landscape. NASA missions have found lots of evidence that Mars was much wetter and warmer, with a thicker atmosphere, billions of years ago.

Mars was named by the ancient Romans for their god of war because its reddish color was reminiscent of blood. Other civilizations also named the planet for this attribute – for example, the Egyptians called it "Her Desher," meaning "the red one." Even today, it is frequently called the "Red Planet" because iron minerals in the Martian dirt oxidize, or rust, causing the surface to look red.

Scientists don't expect to find living things currently thriving on Mars. Instead, they're looking for signs of life that existed long ago, when Mars was warmer and covered with water.

With a radius of 2,106 miles (3,390 kilometers), Mars is about half the size of Earth. If Earth were the size of a nickel, Mars would be about as big as a raspberry.

From an average distance of 142 million miles (228 million kilometers), Mars is 1.5 astronomical units away from the Sun. One astronomical unit (abbreviated as AU), is the distance from the Sun to Earth. From this distance, it takes sunlight 13 minutes to travel from the Sun to Mars.

As Mars orbits the Sun, it completes one rotation every 24.6 hours, which is very similar to one day on Earth (23.9 hours). Martian days are called sols – short for "solar day." A year on Mars lasts 669.6 sols, which is the same as 687 Earth days.

Mars' axis of rotation is tilted 25 degrees with respect to the plane of its orbit around the Sun. This is another similarity with Earth, which has an axial tilt of 23.4 degrees. Like Earth, Mars has distinct seasons, but they last longer than seasons here on Earth since Mars takes longer to orbit the Sun (because it's farther away). And while here on Earth the seasons are evenly spread over the year, lasting 3 months (or one quarter of a year), on Mars the seasons vary in length because of Mars' elliptical, egg-shaped orbit around the Sun.

Spring in the northern hemisphere (autumn in the southern) is the longest season at 194 sols. Autumn in the northern hemisphere (spring in the southern) is the shortest at 142 days. Northern winter/southern summer is 154 sols, and northern summer/southern winter is 178 sols.

Mars has two small moons, Phobos and Deimos, that may be captured asteroids. They're potato-shaped because they have too little mass for gravity to make them spherical.

The moons get their names from the horses that pulled the chariot of the Greek god of war, Ares.

Phobos, the innermost and larger moon, is heavily cratered, with deep grooves on its surface. It is slowly moving towards Mars and will crash into the planet or break apart in about 50 million years.

Deimos is about half as big as Phobos and orbits two and a half times farther away from Mars. Oddly-shaped Deimos is covered in loose dirt that often fills the craters on its surface, making it appear smoother than pockmarked Phobos.

Mars has no rings. However, in 50 million years when Phobos crashes into Mars or breaks apart, it could create a dusty ring around the Red Planet.

When the solar system settled into its current layout about 4.5 billion years ago, Mars formed when gravity pulled swirling gas and dust in to become the fourth planet from the Sun. Mars is about half the size of Earth, and like its fellow terrestrial planets, it has a central core, a rocky mantle, and a solid crust.

Mars has a dense core at its center between 930 and 1,300 miles (1,500 to 2,100 kilometers) in radius. It's made of iron, nickel, and sulfur. Surrounding the core is a rocky mantle between 770 and 1,170 miles (1,240 to 1,880 kilometers) thick, and above that, a crust made of iron, magnesium, aluminum, calcium, and potassium. This crust is between 6 and 30 miles (10 to 50 kilometers) deep.

The Red Planet is actually many colors. At the surface, we see colors such as brown, gold, and tan. The reason Mars looks reddish is due to oxidization – or rusting – of iron in the rocks, regolith (Martian “soil”), and dust of Mars. This dust gets kicked up into the atmosphere and from a distance makes the planet appear mostly red.

Interestingly, while Mars is about half the diameter of Earth, its surface has nearly the same area as Earth’s dry land. Its volcanoes, impact craters, crustal movement, and atmospheric conditions such as dust storms have altered the landscape of Mars over many years, creating some of the solar system's most interesting topographical features.

A large canyon system called Valles Marineris is long enough to stretch from California to New York – more than 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers). This Martian canyon is 200 miles (320 kilometers) at its widest and 4.3 miles (7 kilometers) at its deepest. That's about 10 times the size of Earth's Grand Canyon.

Mars is home to the largest volcano in the solar system, Olympus Mons. It's three times taller than Earth's Mount Everest — which rises 29,029 feet, or 8,848 meters, above the Earth's surface — with a base the size of the state of New Mexico. Olympus Mons stands

Mars appears to have had a watery past, with ancient river valley networks, deltas, and lakebeds, as well as rocks and minerals on the surface that could only have formed in liquid water. Some features suggest that Mars experienced huge floods about 3.5 billion years ago.

There is water on Mars today, but the Martian atmosphere is too thin for liquid water to exist for long on the surface. Today, water on Mars is found in the form of water-ice just under the surface in the polar regions as well as in briny (salty) water, which seasonally flows down some hillsides and crater walls.

Mars has a thin atmosphere made up mostly of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and argon gases. To our eyes, the sky would be hazy and red because of suspended dust instead of the familiar blue tint we see on Earth. Mars' sparse atmosphere doesn't offer much protection from impacts by such objects as meteorites, asteroids, and comets.

The temperature on Mars can be as high as 70 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) or as low as about -225 degrees Fahrenheit (-153 degrees Celsius). And because the atmosphere is so thin, heat from the Sun easily escapes this planet. If you were to stand on the surface of Mars on the equator at noon, it would feel like spring at your feet (75 degrees Fahrenheit or 24 degrees Celsius) and winter at your head (32 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 degrees Celsius).

Occasionally, winds on Mars are strong enough to create dust storms that cover much of the planet. After such storms, it can be months before all of the dust settles.

Mars has no global magnetic field today, but areas of the Martian crust in the southern hemisphere are highly magnetized, indicating traces of a magnetic field from 4 billion years ago.

NASA Launches Twin Satellites to Investigate Mars' Space Weather

NASA's Escape and Plasma Acceleration and Dynamics Explorers (ESCAPADE) mission, which launched Nov. 13, will study Mars' real-time response to the solar wind, helping us better understand Mars' climate history — from a planet that hosted rivers, lakes, and floods billions of years ago, to the cold, dry desert we see on the surface today. The twin, refrigerator-sized orbiters are scheduled to arrive at Mars in September 2027, and begin their science mission the following spring.

Discover More Topics From NASA

Mars Sample Return would be NASA’s most ambitious, multi-mission campaign that would bring carefully selected Martian samples to Earth for…

Mars 2020: Perseverance Rover

NASA’s Mars Perseverance rover seeks signs of ancient life and collects samples of rock and regolith for possible Earth return.

Mars Science Laboratory: Curiosity Rover

Part of NASA's Mars Science Laboratory mission, at the time of launch, Curiosity was the largest and most capable rover…

Mars is the only planet we know of inhabited entirely by robots. Learn more about the Mars Missions.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery.

More NASA Social Accounts

Budget & Annual Reports

Agency Financial Reports

Page Last Updated: Nov 24, 2025

Page Editor: Stephen Carney

Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira