Services Borrow & Renew Interlibrary & Consortium Loans Request & Pick Up Course Reserves Office Delivery Equipment Disability Support Printing & Scanning Off-Campus Access Software LinkedIn Learning

Interlibrary & Consortium Loans

Research Research Consultations Research & Course Guides Citation Tools Subject Librarians Digital Scholarship Data Services Design & Create Digital Publishing Scholarly Communication Copyright Articles & Databases

Research Consultations

Research & Course Guides

Scholarly Communication

Collections Rare Books, Manuscripts, Art & Archives Articles & Databases DigitalGeorgetown Library Catalogs Audio & Video Collection Slavery, Memory & Reconciliation Exhibitions Library Maps & Call Number Locations

Rare Books, Manuscripts, Art & Archives

Audio & Video Collection

Slavery, Memory & Reconciliation

Library Maps & Call Number Locations

Spaces Study Spaces Computing Spaces Meeting & Instruction Spaces Maker Hub Digital Media Studios Gelardin Center Booth Family Center for Special Collections Writing Center Carrels & Lockers Bioethics Research Library Blommer Science Library Lauinger Library Georgetown University in Qatar Library Capitol Campus Library All Georgetown Libraries

Meeting & Instruction Spaces

Digital Media Studios

Booth Family Center for Special Collections

Bioethics Research Library

Blommer Science Library

Georgetown University in Qatar Library

Capitol Campus Library

All Georgetown Libraries

About Hours Maps & Directions Events Give to the Library Policies Contact Us Staff Directory Library Departments Library Showcase

Domestic Policy & Data

International Policy & Data

Historical Sources Background InformationArticles & Primary Sources

Background Information

Articles & Primary Sources

Background Information

Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History Covers all aspects of economic history. Includes histories of individual countries, industries, institutions, key individuals, and other topics.

Making of the Modern World This link opens in a new window Collection of digital facsimile images of 61,000 works of literature on economics and business published from 1450 through 1914.

New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online This link opens in a new window Designed for economists, this encyclopedia's articles read like those in economics journals. This is a continuously updated edition. It retains the descriptions of economic methods from earlier editions and adds more information on the findings of those methods. It also offers a new emphasis on advances in microeconomics, Bayesian theory, game theory and behavioral, international and experimental economics.

World Economic History Resources (Library of Congress) Contains online and print resources dedicated to the study of the history of the world economy, economic thought, and the origins of various economic theories.

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics One of the most popular worldwide resources for researching and understanding topics in economics. Also featured in the CEE are over 80 biographies of famous economists, with summaries of their contributions, links to their works, and and secondary resources.

EDIRC: Economics Departments, Institutes and Research Centers in the World University of Connecticut Department of Economics has links to economics departments, research centers and institutes in universities as well as finance ministries, statistical offices, central banks, think tanks and other non-profit institutes where mainly economists work. Alphabetical list by country. Over 260 entries for Russia.

Articles & Primary Sources

British Periodicals This link opens in a new window Facsimile page images and searchable full text for nearly 500 British periodicals published from the 17th through the early 20th centuries. Topics covered include literature, philosophy, history, science, the fine arts, archaeology, architecture, and the social sciences.

Humanities & Social Sciences Index Retrospective: 1907-1984 This link opens in a new window Indexes book reviews and articles from English-language periodicals, including scholarly journals and numerous lesser-known but important specialized magazines. Covers a wide range of interdisciplinary fields.

Keesing's World News Archive This link opens in a new window (Coverage 1931-2015): Web-based version of the index to Keesing's Record of World Events. This is an authoritative monthly digest of worldwide political, diplomatic and economic affairs since 1931. more... less... Topics cover constitution and governance, legislation, economics, politics, foreign relations, elections, legal issues, social issues, disarmament and rearmament, terrorism, human rights, war, disasters, the environment, and science and technology.

Economist Historical Archive 1843-2006 This link opens in a new window Fully searchable complete facsimile edition of The Economist from 1843 to 2006. Includes full-color images, multiple search indexes, topic and area supplements and surveys, a gallery of front covers and a selection of exportable financial tables.

<< Previous: International Policy & Data

Next: Citation Tools >>

Last Updated: Sep 8, 2025 6:30 PM

URL: https://guides.library.georgetown.edu/econ

Georgetown University Library 37th & O Streets, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20057-1174 202-687-7607

Notice of Non-Discrimination