This Cybersecurity wiki provides a set of evolving resources on cybersecurity, broadly defined, and includes an annotated list of relevant articles and literature, which can be searched in a number of ways. Please see below. It is intended as a tool/resource for researchers, technologists, students, policy-makers and others who are interested in cybersecurity issues more broadly. For more information about this first phase of the project, including the team, methodology, and opportunities to contribute, please see About the Project.

If you have feedback, comments, or suggested additional readings/resources, please contact: cybersecurity-feedback@cyber.law.harvard.edu.

Prior to suggesting material for inclusion in the wiki, please consult the Submitting Feedback page.

The quickest way to get started is by using the Table of Contents as a guide to searching articles by type or category. Some of the articles have wiki entries which include a synopsis, full bibliographic information, and additional relevant notes.

You might also wish to consult the list of all articles and use the filtering tool to receive customized search results by type, category, or a free text search term.

The Case Studies page presents a list of selected case studies with short summaries and links to related literature such as news articles and investigative reports.

Selected Syllabi (H2O)

The Suggested Syllabi section uses the H2O platform to feature a selection of playlists for instruction. H2O is a Web-based platform for creating, editing, organizing, consuming, and sharing course materials. Using H2O, professors may freely develop and collate course materials by selecting modules from a wide — and growing — repository and edit those modules to the sections that are most relevant to their particular pedagogy and approach.

For a full explanation of how to browse the wiki, please consult the Help page.

Cybersecurity @ Berkman

This page was last edited on 31 August 2012, at 16:20.

About the Cybersecurity Wiki