News & Events News & Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources

Video Series on NASA+

Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia

International Space Station

NASA Orbiter Shines New Light on Long-Running Martian Mystery

CHAPEA Crew Begins Stay Inside NASA’s Mars Habitat for Second Mission

NASA, NOAA Rank 2025 Ozone Hole as 5th Smallest Since 1992

Search All NASA Missions

A to Z List of Missions

Upcoming Launches and Landings

Spaceships and Rockets

Communicating with Missions

James Webb Space Telescope

Hubble Space Telescope

International Space Station

Spaceships and Rockets

Explore Earth Science

Earth Science in Action

Earth Science Researchers

Pluto & Dwarf Planets

Asteroids, Comets & Meteors

The Search for Life in the Universe

Astrophysics & Space Science

The Sun & Heliophysics

Biological & Physical Sciences

Human Space Travel Research

Air Traffic Solutions

Technology Transfer & Spinoffs

Space Travel Technology

Technology Living in Space

Manufacturing and Materials

For Kids and Students

For Colleges and Universities

Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers

STEM Engagement at NASA

Centers and Facilities

Doing Business with NASA

Video Series on NASA+

NASA’s Roman Observatory Passes Spate of Key Tests

Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’

Europa Clipper Captures Uranus With Star Tracker Camera

CHAPEA Crew Begins Stay Inside NASA’s Mars Habitat for Second Mission

NASA’s 2025 Astronaut Candidates: Shaping Artemis Exploration

The Overview Effect: Astronaut Perspectives from 25 Years in Low Earth Orbit

NASA, NOAA Rank 2025 Ozone Hole as 5th Smallest Since 1992

NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions

NASA Orbiter Shines New Light on Long-Running Martian Mystery

Amendment 24: F.10 Payloads and Research Investigations on the Surface of the Moon (PRISM) Due Dates Reset and Other Changes.

What’s Up: November 2025 Skywatching Tips from NASA

Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’

Corrections to F.3 Exoplanets Research

NASA’s TESS Spacecraft Triples Size of Pleiades Star Cluster

PLANETS Units Have Landed – Free NASA-Funded Out-of-School Time Resources

Amendment 26: D.2 Astrophysics Data Analysis Final Text and Due Dates Released

NASA & GLOBE Connect People, Land, and Space

NASA’s X-59 Completes First Flight, Prepares for More Flight Testing

NASA Flights Study Cosmic Ray Effects for Air, Future Space Travelers

NASA, Partners Push Forward with Remotely Piloted Airspace Integration

Amendment 24: F.10 Payloads and Research Investigations on the Surface of the Moon (PRISM) Due Dates Reset and Other Changes.

NASA, Industry Weave Data Fabric with Artificial Intelligence

NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions

New Citizen Science Proposals Funded in 2025

The Overview Effect: Astronaut Perspectives from 25 Years in Low Earth Orbit

Pódcast en español de la NASA estrena su tercera temporada

Las carreras en la NASA despegan con las pasantías

El X-59 de la NASA completa las pruebas electromagnéticas

What Is the Spooky Science of Quantum Entanglement?

Learn how particles engage in a mind-boggling phenomenon that forms the backbone of quantum mechanics.

There’s a lot we don’t know about our universe — in fact, 95% of it remains a mystery to us. That’s why scientists continue to probe our understanding of quantum physics.

There are many facets to quantum science, but let’s zoom in on something that Albert Einstein called “spooky action at a distance”: quantum entanglement.

What is Quantum Entanglement?

Quantum science explores and helps explain some of the strangest phenomena in the universe, even shedding light on the mystery of dark matter and dark energy. Quantum is the study of atoms and subatomic particles, and how they interact with each other. It examines the very stuff we, and everything around us, are made of.

One of the most far-out phenomena of quantum theory is quantum entanglement, the idea that particles of the same origin, which were once connected, always stay connected. Even if they separate and move far apart in time and space, they continue to share something beyond a mere bond — they shed their original quantum states and take on a new, united quantum state which they maintain forever. This means if something happens to one particle, it affects all the others with which it’s entangled.

A “Spooky” Science

In 1935, Albert Einstein and colleagues first pointed out the “spooky” action of quantum entanglement. Quantum entanglement, however, appeared to conflict with Einstein’s theory of special relativity, which postulates that nothing can travel faster than the speed of light and is demonstrated mathematically by the well-known equation E=mc2.

The ability to instantaneously measure the quantum state of one particle by measuring that of its entangled partner somewhere else in the universe means that that information would have to be delivered faster than lightspeed. This contradicts Einstein’s theory of special relativity. What also remains a mystery is how exactly these particles can interact from such a far distance to share information.

Three decades would pass until another scientist, John Stewart Bell, would develop a method to test the phenomenon, which ultimately enabled later scientists to confirm quantum entanglement.

Classical vs. Quantum Physics

If classical physics is life as we know it, the quantum world is like an alternate universe.

Classical physics is the force governing an extremely predictable world, where an apple set on a table stays there until something causes it to move again.

In the quantum world, not only can the apple end up on Mars, but, hypothetically, it could exist both on the table and on Mars at the same time. It could even be inextricably tied to another apple in some other part of the universe through entanglement. Thus, “reality” as we know it is much more uncertain, with the possibility for many solutions or outcomes to exist, rather than just one.

Quantum entanglement remains a spooky part of our world. Check out the resources below to learn more about how NASA scientists are working to unravel the mysteries of our quantum universe.

SEAQUE (Space Entanglement and Annealing Quantum Experiment)

How Atoms Are Defying Gravity in NASA's Cold Atom Lab

NASA Demonstrates ‘Ultra-Cool’ Quantum Sensor for First Time in Space

NASA’s Biological and Physical Sciences Division pioneers scientific discovery and enables exploration by using space environments to conduct investigations not possible on Earth. Studying biological and physical phenomenon under extreme conditions allows researchers to advance the fundamental scientific knowledge required to go farther and stay longer in space, while also benefitting life on Earth.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery.

More NASA Social Accounts

Budget & Annual Reports

Agency Financial Reports

Page Last Updated: Apr 02, 2025

Page Editor: clpritch

Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira