Search Icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Search Icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Enter search term Search

About Us Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We’re one of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks working together with the Board of Governors to support a healthy economy. Our job is to serve the American public — to serve you. And our mission is to foster economic stability and strength. Learn more about our bank > Who We Are & What We Do Our Work in Our Communities Doing Business with the Bank Our Leadership Our Governance Connect with Us Request a Speaker Holiday Schedule

We’re one of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks working together with the Board of Governors to support a healthy economy. Our job is to serve the American public — to serve you. And our mission is to foster economic stability and strength.

Learn more about our bank >

Who We Are & What We Do

Our Work in Our Communities

Doing Business with the Bank

Economic Research Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We conduct research to support policymaking and thought leadership on issues important to the Federal Reserve and the Fifth District. We also inform the public through our data and economic analysis, publications, presentations and educational resources. Learn more about Economic Research > Data & Analysis Publications Blog Podcast Events CORE Week District Dialogues Contacts Our Team

We conduct research to support policymaking and thought leadership on issues important to the Federal Reserve and the Fifth District. We also inform the public through our data and economic analysis, publications, presentations and educational resources.

Learn more about Economic Research >

Events CORE Week District Dialogues

Region & Communities Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We share research, data and resources and regularly engage regional leaders and policymakers to understand and address community‑specific economic issues. Center for Rural Economies Regional Data & Analysis Community Development & Engagement Our Team Our Region Maryland Washington D.C. North Carolina South Carolina Virginia West Virginia

We share research, data and resources and regularly engage regional leaders and policymakers to understand and address community‑specific economic issues.

Center for Rural Economies

Regional Data & Analysis

Community Development & Engagement

Our Region Maryland Washington D.C. North Carolina South Carolina Virginia West Virginia

Banking Supervision Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We promote the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, monitor their impact on the financial system, and ensure that financial institutions are protecting consumers. Supervision & Credit Member Banking Overview Banker Resources Banking Research & Analysis Our Team Leadership Financial Economists

We promote the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, monitor their impact on the financial system, and ensure that financial institutions are protecting consumers.

Member Banking Overview

Banking Research & Analysis

Our Team Leadership Financial Economists

Payments Services Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We help keep the country's electronic payment system running and make sure banks have enough cash and coin to do business. Payments Overview Payments Outreach Financial Services Payments 101

We help keep the country's electronic payment system running and make sure banks have enough cash and coin to do business.

Education Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} We work with teachers, students and the public to enhance understanding of economics, personal finance and the Federal Reserve. Learn more about our resources and educational programs. > Resources & Programs Economic Education Outreach Our Team

We work with teachers, students and the public to enhance understanding of economics, personal finance and the Federal Reserve.

Learn more about our resources and educational programs. >

Economic Education Outreach

News Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} News News Releases Speeches Media Advisories Our News Media Kit Contacts

Events Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Events

Publications Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Publications Research Community Development Education

Community Development

Topics Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Topics

Careers Arrow icon .st0{fill:none;stroke-width:1.5;stroke-miterlimit:10;} Careers

Has Nuclear Energy's Time Come?

Interview with Alan Auerbach

Good Data is Hard to Find

Community Colleges and Workforce Training in the Criminal Justice System

Digital Assets and Blockchain Through an Economics Lens

It seems like everyone is talking about "crypto" these days. The word spans a diverse array of financial products and services, which collectively I'll refer to as "digital assets." Digital assets have developed into a complicated ecosystem, with a foundation in blockchain technology. Blockchain is a decentralized and distributed database, similar to a massive virtual ledger where each block is an entry. A blockchain can often be public and permanent, meaning no one owns it, everyone can see everyone's accounts, and transactions, which are updated in real time, cannot be reversed once they are confirmed.

Building upon this ledger are an array of components: applications connecting crypto to the traditional financial system; smart contracts, including decentralized exchanges and lending; assets, such as tokens, stablecoins, and cryptocurrencies; and finally, settlement in the blockchain. Assets like Bitcoin and Ethereum receive the most attention, but without the other components of the ecosystem, the impact of cryptocurrencies and stablecoins would be limited.

Money is a payments mechanism and store of value. This is why measures of the money supply extend beyond the amount of currency in circulation to include balances in bank accounts (M1) and retail money market mutual fund shares (M2). Private money was prevalent in U.S. history before the 1930s when private banks issued circulating bank notes. The variety of notes led to challenges, including counterfeiting, volatile exchange rates, and redemption risks arising from risky banks.

Digital technologies solve some of these issues. Some digital assets are decentralized and "distributed," meaning that data are stored across peer-to-peer networks without a centralized official database. The result can be a dataset that facilitates settlement (transactions are public and recorded as public blocks) and is resilient (if any node goes down, the network remains robust).

Distribution may add resilience, but blockchain approaches to currency can be inefficient as data are replicated across the network, a more costly approach than relying on a trusted central intermediary. Some of the earliest crypto currencies like Bitcoin have had values that fluctuate widely, impairing their use as money but making them potentially valuable assets for a diversified investment portfolio. In response, we have seen dramatic growth in stablecoins since 2020. Stablecoins (for example, Tether, USDC, and Binance) are usually pegged to a reference asset like the U.S. dollar, allowing their holder to use them as a dollar-denominated asset and potentially as payment in cross-border transactions. Currently, the most common use case for stablecoins is within the digital ecosystem, where they are involved in 80 percent of trading.

"Stability for Stablecoins?" Econ Focus, Fourth Quarter 2024

"How Stable are Stablecoins?" Speaking of the Economy, Oct. 12, 2022.

"Why Stablecoins Fail: An Economists Post-Mortem on Terra," Economic Brief No. 22-24, July 2022.

"A Historical Perspective on Digital Currencies," Economic Brief No. 22-21, June 2022.

Late last year, the overall value of digital assets approached $3.8 trillion, reflecting continued growth in cryptocurrencies, stablecoins, and other related financial products. Why are so many people interested in them?

First, digital assets can be an investment. As institutional asset managers develop the ability and legal framework to hold digital assets, cryptocurrencies may become part of the saving strategies of institutional investors and private individuals. University endowments, in particular, have been leaders in allocating assets to novel investments with higher risk and higher returns, and they have been increasingly allocating parts of their portfolios to these assets. Digital assets could be similar to commodities such as gold whose value exceeds its intrinsic value due to scarcity, its historical use as a store of wealth, and its properties as an inflation hedge. Further harmonization of the regulation of digital assets may also affect their investment value.

Second, such technologies can allow for the tokenization — or digitization — of real and financial assets. Tokenization would allow for trading outside of market hours, real-time settlement, and fractional ownership, as transactions, settlement, and custody are facilitated by the blockchain. Through decentralized physical infrastructure networks (DePIN), individuals may contribute their own physical resources like data storage, mobile hotspots, or even EV chargers to be shared and tokenized.

Third, digital assets can allow for smart contracts and reduce inefficiencies associated with institutional financial markets settlement and cross-border frictions. It is worth noting here that unless stablecoins or cryptocurrencies take over from traditional currencies completely, traditional exchange rate variability would remain a cross-border issue.

Finally, digital technologies can allow for increased financial inclusion and fractional payments. More than 4 percent of U.S. households do not have a bank or credit union account, with the share of unbanked much higher among Black, Hispanic, and American Indian or Alaska Native Americans. Almost a quarter of American households do not have credit cards, preventing them from making digital purchases and restricting access to credit. If adopted in scale, digital assets may result in lower payment costs for these groups and for all of us.

Anna Kovner is executive vice president and director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Receive an email notification when Econ Focus is posted online.

By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice.

As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request.

If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted.

You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email.

Receive email alerts for speeches, press releases, and news.