Geothermal energy is heat that is generated within Earth. It is a renewable resource that can be harvested for human use.

Earth Science, Geology, Engineering

Geothermal energy is the heat produced deep in Earth's core. Geothermal energy is a clean, renewable resource that can be harnessed for use as heat and electricity.

Photograph by Sylvain Entressangle, My Shot

Geothermal energy is heat that is generated within Earth. (Geo means “earth,” and thermal means “heat” in Greek.) It is a renewable resource that can be harvested for human use.About 2,900 kilometers (1,800 miles) below Earth’s crust, or surface, is the hottest part of our planet: the core. A small portion of the core’s heat comes from the friction and gravitational pull formed when Earth was created more than four billion years ago. However, the vast majority of Earth’s heat is constantly generated by the decay of radioactive isotopes, such as potassium-40 and thorium-232.Isotopes are forms of an element that have a different number of neutrons than the most common versions of the element’s atom.

Potassium, for instance, has 20 neutrons in its nucleus. Potassium-40, however, has 21 neutrons. As potassium-40 decays, its nucleus changes, emitting enormous amounts of energy (radiation). Potassium-40 most often decays to isotopes of calcium (calcium-40) and argon (argon-40).Radioactive decay is a continual process in the core. Temperatures there rise to more than 5,000° Celsius (about 9,000° Fahrenheit). Heat from the core is constantly radiating outward and warming rocks, water, gas, and other geological material.Earth’s temperature rises with depth from the surface to the core. This gradual change in temperature is known as the geothermal gradient. In most parts of the world, the geothermal gradient is about 25° C per 1 kilometer of depth (1° F per 77 feet of depth).If underground rock formations are heated to about 700-1,300° C (1,300-2,400° F), they can become magma. Magma is molten (partly melted) rock permeated by gas and gas bubbles. Magma exists in the mantle and lower crust, and sometimes bubbles to the surface as lava.

Magma heats nearby rocks and underground aquifers. Hot water can be released through geysers, hot springs, steam vents, underwater hydrothermal vents, and mud pots.

These are all sources of geothermal energy. Their heat can be captured and used directly for heat, or their steam can be used to generate electricity. Geothermal energy can be used to heat structures such as buildings, parking lots, and sidewalks.Most of the Earth’s geothermal energy does not bubble out as magma, water, or steam. It remains in the mantle, emanating outward at a slow pace and collecting as pockets of high heat. This dry geothermal heat can be accessed by drilling, and enhanced with injected water to create steam.Many countries have developed methods of tapping into geothermal energy. Different types of geothermal energy are available in different parts of the world. In Iceland, abundant sources of hot, easily accessible underground water make it possible for most people to rely on geothermal sources as a safe, dependable, and inexpensive source of energy. Other countries, such as the U.S., must drill for geothermal energy at greater cost.Harvesting Geothermal Energy: Heating and CoolingLow-Temperature Geothermal EnergyAlmost anywhere in the world, geothermal heat can be accessed and used immediately as a source of heat. This heat energy is called low-temperature geothermal energy. Low-temperature geothermal energy is obtained from pockets of heat about 150° C (302° F). Most pockets of low-temperature geothermal energy are found just a few meters below ground.Low-temperature geothermal energy can be used for heating greenhouses, homes, fisheries, and industrial processes. Low-temperature energy is most efficient when used for heating, although it can sometimes be used to generate electricity.People have long used this type of geothermal energy for engineering, comfort, healing, and cooking. Archaeological evidence shows that 10,000 years ago, groups of Native Americans gathered around naturally occurring hot springs to recuperate or take refuge from conflict. In the third century BCE, scholars and leaders warmed themselves in a hot spring fed by a stone pool near Lishan, a mountain in central China. One of the most famous hot spring spas is in the appropriately named town of Bath, England. Starting construction in about 60 CE, Roman conquerors built an elaborate system of steam rooms and pools using heat from the region’s shallow pockets of low-temperature geothermal energy.

The hot springs of Chaudes Aigues, France, have provided a source of income and energy for the town since the 1300s. Tourists flock to the town for its elite spas. The low-temperature geothermal energy also supplies heat to homes and businesses.The United States opened its first geothermal district heating system in 1892 in Boise, Idaho. This system still provides heat to about 450 homes.Co-Produced Geothermal EnergyCo-produced geothermal energy technology relies on other energy sources. This form of geothermal energy uses water that has been heated as a byproduct in oil and gas wells.In the United States, about 25 billion barrels of hot water are produced every year as a byproduct. In the past, this hot water was simply discarded. Recently, it has been recognized as a potential source of even more energy: Its steam can be used to generate electricity to be used immediately or sold to the grid.One of the first co-produced geothermal energy projects was initiated at the Rocky Mountain Oilfield Testing Center in the U.S. state of Wyoming.

Newer technology has allowed co-produced geothermal energy facilities to be portable. Although still in experimental stages, mobile power plants hold tremendous potential for isolated or impoverished communities.Geothermal Heat PumpsGeothermal heat pumps (GHPs) take advantage of Earth’s heat, and can be used almost anywhere in the world. GHPs are drilled about three to 90 meters (10 to 300 feet) deep, much shallower than most oil and natural gas wells. GHPs do not require fracturing bedrock to reach their energy source.

A pipe connected to a GHP is arranged in a continuous loop—called a "slinky loop"—that circles underground and above ground, usually throughout a building. The loop can also be contained entirely underground, to heat a parking lot or landscaped area.In this system, water or other liquids (such as glycerol, similar to a car’s antifreeze) move through the pipe. During the cold season, the liquid absorbs underground geothermal heat. It carries the heat upward through the building and gives off warmth through a duct system. These heated pipes can also run through hot water tanks and offset water-heating costs.During the summer, the GHP system works the opposite way: The liquid in the pipes is warmed from the heat in the building or parking lot, and carries the heat to be cooled underground.The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has called geothermal heating the most energy-efficient and environmentally safe heating and cooling system. The largest GHP system was completed in 2012 at Ball State University in Indiana. The system replaced a coal-fired boiler system, and experts estimate the university will save about two million dollars a year in heating costs.Harvesting Geothermal Energy: ElectricityIn order to obtain enough energy to generate electricity, geothermal power plants rely on heat that exists a few kilometers below the surface of Earth. In some areas, the heat can naturally exist underground as pockets steam or hot water. However, most areas need to be “enhanced” with injected water to create steam.Dry-Steam Power PlantsDry-steam power plants take advantage of natural underground sources of steam. The steam is piped directly to a power plant, where it is used to fuel turbines and generate electricity.Dry steam is the oldest type of power plant to generate electricity using geothermal energy. The first dry-steam power plant was constructed in Larderello, Italy, in 1911. Today, the dry-steam power plants at Larderello continue to supply electricity to more than a million residents of the area.There are only two known sources of underground steam in the United States: Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming and The Geysers in California. Since Yellowstone is a protected area, The Geysers is the only place where a dry-steam power plant is in use. It is one of the largest geothermal energy complexes in the world, and provides about a fifth of all renewable energy in the U.S. state of California.

Flash-Steam Power Plant

Flash-steam power plants use naturally occurring sources of underground hot water and steam. Water that is hotter than 182° C (360° F) is pumped into a low-pressure area. Some of the water “flashes,” or evaporates rapidly into steam, and is funneled out to power a turbine and generate electricity. Any remaining water can be flashed in a separate tank to extract more energy.

Flash-steam power plants are the most common type of geothermal power plants. The volcanically active island nation of Iceland supplies nearly all its electrical needs through a series of flash-steam geothermal power plants. The steam and excess warm water produced by the flash-steam process heat icy sidewalks and parking lots in the frigid Arctic winter.The islands of the Philippines also sit over a tectonically active area, the "Ring of Fire" that rims the Pacific Ocean. Government and industry in the Philippines have invested in flash-steam power plants, and today the nation is second only to the United States in its use of geothermal energy. In fact, the largest single geothermal power plant is a flash-steam facility in Malitbog, Philippines.Binary Cycle Power PlantsBinary cycle power plants use a unique process to conserve water and generate heat. Water is heated underground to about 107°-182° C (225°-360° F). The hot water is contained in a pipe, which cycles above ground. The hot water heats a liquid organic compound that has a lower boiling point than water. The organic liquid creates steam, which flows through a turbine and powers a generator to create electricity. The only emission in this process is steam. The water in the pipe is recycled back to the ground, to be reheated by Earth and provide heat for the organic compound again.The Beowawe Geothermal Facility in the U.S. state of Nevada uses the binary cycle to generate electricity. The organic compound used at the facility is an industrial refrigerant (tetrafluoroethane, a greenhouse gas). This refrigerant has a much lower boiling point than water, meaning it is converted into gas at low temperatures. The gas fuels the turbines, which are connected to electrical generators.Enhanced Geothermal SystemsEarth has virtually endless amounts of energy and heat beneath its surface. However, it is not possible to use it as energy unless the underground areas are "hydrothermal." This means the underground areas are not only hot, but also contain liquid and are permeable. Many areas do not have all three of these components. An enhanced geothermal system (EGS) uses drilling, fracturing, and injection to provide fluid and permeability in areas that have hot—but dry—underground rock.To develop an EGS, an “injection well” is drilled vertically into the ground. Depending on the type of rock, this can be as shallow as one kilometer (0.6 mile) to as deep as 4.5 kilometers (2.8 miles). High-pressure cold water is injected into the drilled space, which forces the rock to create new fractures, expand existing fractures, or dissolve. This creates a reservoir of underground fluid.

Water is pumped through the injection well and absorbs the rocks’ heat as it flows through the reservoir. This hot water, called brine, is then piped back up to Earth’s surface through a “production well.” The heated brine is contained in a pipe. It warms a secondary fluid that has a low boiling point, which evaporates to steam and powers a turbine. The brine cools off, and cycles back down through the injection well to absorb underground heat again. There are no gaseous emissions besides the water vapor from the evaporated liquid.Pumping water into the ground for EGSs can cause seismic activity, or small earthquakes. In Basel, Switzerland, the injection process caused hundreds of tiny earthquakes that grew to more significant seismic activity even after the water injection was halted. This led to the geothermal project being canceled in 2009.Geothermal Energy and the EnvironmentGeothermal energy is a renewable resource. Earth has been emitting heat for about 4.5 billion years, and will continue to emit heat for billions of years into the future because of the ongoing radioactive decay in Earth’s core.However, most wells that extract the heat will eventually cool, especially if heat is extracted more quickly than it is given time to replenish. Larderello, Italy, site of the world’s first electrical plant supplied by geothermal energy, has seen its steam pressure fall by more than 25 percent since the 1950s.Reinjecting water can sometimes help a cooling geothermal site last longer. However, this process can cause “micro-earthquakes.” Although most of these are too small to be felt by people or register on a scale of magnitude, sometimes the ground can quake at more threatening levels and cause the geothermal project to shut down, as it did in Basel, Switzerland.

Geothermal systems do not require enormous amounts of freshwater. In binary systems, water is only used as a heating agent, and is not exposed or evaporated. It can be recycled, used for other purposes, or released into the atmosphere as nontoxic steam. However, if the geothermal fluid is not contained and recycled in a pipe, it can absorb harmful substances such as arsenic, boron, and fluoride. These toxic substances can be carried to the surface and released when the water evaporates. In addition, if the fluid leaks to other underground water systems, it can contaminate clean sources of drinking water and aquatic habitats.

AdvantagesThere are many advantages to using geothermal energy either directly or indirectly:

Geothermal energy is renewable; it is not a fossil fuel that will be eventually used up. Earth is continuously radiating heat out from its core, and will continue to do so for billions of years.

Some form of geothermal energy can be accessed and harvested anywhere in the world.

Using geothermal energy is relatively clean. Most systems only emit water vapor, although some emit very small amounts of sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxides, and particulates.

Geothermal power plants can last for decades and possibly centuries. If a reservoir is managed properly, the amount of extracted energy can be balanced with the rock’s rate of renewing its heat.

Unlike other renewable energy sources, geothermal systems are “baseload.” This means they can work in the summer or winter, and are not dependent on changing factors such as the presence of wind or sun. Geothermal power plants produce electricity or heat 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

The space it takes to build a geothermal facility is much more compact than other power plants. To produce a GWh (a gigawatt hour, or one million kilowatts of energy for one hour, an enormous amount of energy), a geothermal plant uses the equivalent of about 1,046 square kilometers (404 square miles) of land. To produce the same GWh, wind energy requires 3,458 square kilometers (1,335 square miles), a solar photovoltaic center requires 8,384 square kilometers (3,237 square miles), and coal plants use about 9,433 square kilometers (3,642 square miles).

Geothermal energy systems are adaptable to many different conditions.

They can be used to heat, cool, or power individual homes, whole districts, or industrial processes.

DisadvantagesHarvesting geothermal energy still poses many challenges:

The process of injecting high-pressure streams of water into the planet can result in minor seismic activity, or small earthquakes.

Geothermal plants have been linked to subsidence, or the slow sinking of land. This happens as the underground fractures collapse upon themselves. This can lead to damaged pipelines, roadways, buildings, and natural drainage systems.

Geothermal plants can release small amounts of greenhouse gases such as hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide.

Water that flows through underground reservoirs can pick up trace amounts of toxic elements such as arsenic, mercury, and selenium. These harmful substances can be leaked to water sources if the geothermal system is not properly insulated.

Although the process requires almost no fuel to run, the initial cost of installing geothermal technology is expensive. Developing countries may not have the sophisticated infrastructure or start-up costs to invest in a geothermal power plant. Several facilities in the Philippines, for example, were made possible by investments from U.S. industry and government agencies. Today, the plants are Philippine-owned and operated.

Geothermal Energy and PeopleGeothermal energy exists in different forms all over Earth (by steam vents, lava, geysers, or simply dry heat), and there are different possibilities for extracting and using this heat.In New Zealand, natural geysers and steam vents heat swimming pools, homes, greenhouses, and prawn farms. New Zealanders also use dry geothermal heat to dry timber and feedstock.Other countries, such as Iceland, have taken advantage of molten rock and magma resources from volcanic activity to provide heat for homes and buildings. In Iceland, almost 90 percent of the country’s people use geothermal heating resources. Iceland also relies on its natural geysers to melt snow, warm fisheries, and heat greenhouses.The United States generates the most amount of geothermal energy of any other country. Every year, the U.S. generates at least 15 billion kilowatt-hours, or the equivalent of burning about 25 million barrels of oil. Industrial geothermal technologies have been concentrated in the western U.S. In 2012, Nevada had 59 geothermal projects either operational or in development, followed by California with 31 projects, and Oregon with 16 projects.The cost of geothermal energy technology has gone down in the last decade, and is becoming more economically possible for individuals and companies.

BalneotherapyBalneotherapy is the treatment of disease by spa waters, usually by bathing and drinking. Some famous spas in the United States that offer balneotherapy include Hot Springs, Arkansas, and Warm Springs, Georgia. The most famous balneotheraputic spa in the world, Iceland's Blue Lagoon, is not a natural hot spring. It is an artificial feature where water from a local geothermal power plant is pumped over a lava bed rich in silica and sulfur. These elements react with the warm water to create a bright blue lake with alleged healing properties.

Since 2015 the three countries with the greatest capacity for geothermal energy use have included the United States, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Turkey and Kenya have been steadily building geothermal energy capacity as well.

Ring of GeothermalGeothermal energy sources are often located on plate boundaries, where Earth's crust is constantly interacting with the hot mantle below. The Pacific's so-called Ring of Fire and East Africa's Rift Valley are volcanically active areas that hold enormous potential for geothermal power generation.

The FumarolesThere are no geysers at The Geysers, one of the most productive geothermal plants in the world. The California facility sits on fumarolesvents in Earth's crust where steam and other gases (not liquids) escape from Earth's interior.

liquid used to lower the freezing point of a cooling substance.

an underground layer of rock or earth that holds groundwater.

type of power plant that runs at near-full capacity 24 hours a day, every day.

solid rock beneath the Earth's soil and sand.

geothermal power plant that uses heated underground water to warm a fluid with a lower boiling point than water, which creates a steam that powers turbines and electrical generators.

water or other fluid pumped through an enhanced geothermal system (EGS).

substance that is created by the production of another material.

dark, solid fossil fuel mined from the earth.

to pack tightly together.

heat obtained from the steam and hot water produced as a byproduct of petroleum and natural gas wells.

the extremely hot center of Earth, another planet, or a star.

geothermal power plant that uses natural pockets of steam to drive turbines and electrical generators.

the sudden shaking of Earth's crust caused by the release of energy along fault lines or from volcanic activity.

set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge.

chemical that cannot be separated into simpler substances.

discharge or release.

the art and science of building, maintaining, moving, and demolishing structures.

geothermal power plant where water or another fluid is injected into bedrock, sometimes causing fracturing and creating reservoirs of geothermal heat.

to change from a liquid to a gas or vapor.

geothermal power plant where fluid at temperatures greater than 182 degrees Celsius (360 degrees Fahrenheit) is pumped under high pressure into a tank held at a much lower pressure, causing some of the fluid to rapidly vaporize, or "flash." The vapor drives a turbine, which drives an electrical generator.

force produced by rubbing one thing against another.

heat energy generated within the Earth.

gradual change in temperature from the Earth's core (hot) to its crust (cool), about 25° Celsus per kilometer of depth (1° Fahrenheit per 70 feet of depth).

heating or cooling system that pipes water in a continuous loop from wells drilled into the Earth through the space being heated or cooled, and back again.

natural hot spring that sometimes erupts with water or steam.

physical attraction between two massive objects.

gas in the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, methane, water vapor, and ozone, that absorbs solar heat reflected by the surface of the Earth, warming the atmosphere.

environment where an organism lives throughout the year or for shorter periods of time.

small flow of water flowing naturally from an underground water source heated by hot or molten rock.

related to hot water, especially water heated by the Earth's internal temperature.

wages, salary, or amount of money earned.

structures and facilities necessary for the functioning of a society, such as roads.

to set one thing or organism apart from others.

atom with an unbalanced number of neutrons in its nucleus, giving it a different atomic weight than other atoms of the same element.

molten rock, or magma, that erupts from volcanoes or fissures in the Earth's surface.

heat obtained from underground fluids (usually water) of 150 degrees Celsius (300 degrees Fahrenheit) or less.

molten, or partially melted, rock beneath the Earth's surface.

middle layer of the Earth, made of mostly solid rock.

natural spring filled with hot, bubbling mud.

person whose ancestors were native inhabitants of North or South America. Native American usually does not include Eskimo or Hawaiian people.

type of fossil fuel made up mostly of the gas methane.

particle in an atom having no electrical charge.

allowing liquid and gases to pass through.

fossil fuel formed from the remains of ancient organisms. Also called crude oil.

able to convert solar radiation to electrical energy.

able to be easily transported from one place to another.

having unstable atomic nuclei and emitting subatomic particles and radiation.

to recover from an injury or strenuous activity.

public land set aside to protect native wildlife.

resource that can replenish itself at a similar rate to its use by people.

horseshoe-shaped string of volcanoes and earthquake sites around edges of the Pacific Ocean.

knowledgeable or complex.

facility, usually with mineral hot springs, offering health benefits.

to heat something by placing it over boiling water.

sinking or lowering of the Earth's surface, either by natural or artificial processes.

the science of using tools and complex machines to make human life easier or more profitable.

machine that captures the energy of a moving fluid, such as air or water.

crack in Earth's crust that spews hot gases and mineral-rich water.

kinetic energy produced by the movement of air, able to be converted to mechanical power.

The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or group credited.

For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation, please contact your teacher. They will best know the preferred format. When you reach out to them, you will need the page title, URL, and the date you accessed the resource.

If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the corner of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media.

Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service.

Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. You cannot download interactives.

Explorer at Work: Vivian Giang

National Geographic Explorer and PhD student Vivian Giang studies geothermal energy development on Indigenous lands. Her work focuses on fostering collaborative partnerships with Indigenous communities and establishing free, prior, informed, and continuous consent to ensure that Indigenous voices and knowledge are integral to conversations as the push grows towards renewable, geothermal energy.

Renewable resources are an energy source that cannot be depleted and are able to supply a continuous source of clean energy.

Renewable energy comes from sources that will not be used up in our lifetimes, such as the sun and wind.

Iceland uses geothermal energy to provide water and heat to residents.

According to the United States Geologic Survey, there are approximately 1,500 potentially active volcanoes worldwide. Most are located around the Pacific Ocean in what is commonly called the Ring of Fire. A volcano is defined as an opening in Earth's crust through which lava, ash, and gases erupt. The term also includes the cone-shaped landform built by repeated eruptions over time.

In its common usage, the word heat refers to both thermal energy and its transfer from a warmer object to a cooler object. Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that studies heat transfer between systems. This field has observed the laws of thermodynamics which define how heat, within a system, flows and does work. In any system, when two objects with different temperatures are brought into contact with one another, they will eventually establish thermodynamic equilibrium. As heat moves from one object to the other, physical changes will take place: the balloon filled with gas will grow or shrink, the roadway will expand or contract, the electrical resistance in the circuit will increase or decrease, and these changes are predictable and can be measured. Engineers and scientists take these laws into account when they design projects and experiments. Use these resources to learn more about thermodynamics.

articleExplorer at Work: Vivian GiangNational Geographic Explorer and PhD student Vivian Giang studies geothermal energy development on Indigenous lands. Her work focuses on fostering collaborative partnerships with Indigenous communities and establishing free, prior, informed, and continuous consent to ensure that Indigenous voices and knowledge are integral to conversations as the push grows towards renewable, geothermal energy.9

Explorer at Work: Vivian Giang

National Geographic Explorer and PhD student Vivian Giang studies geothermal energy development on Indigenous lands. Her work focuses on fostering collaborative partnerships with Indigenous communities and establishing free, prior, informed, and continuous consent to ensure that Indigenous voices and knowledge are integral to conversations as the push grows towards renewable, geothermal energy.

encyclopedic entryRenewable ResourcesRenewable resources are an energy source that cannot be depleted and are able to supply a continuous source of clean energy. 655

Renewable resources are an energy source that cannot be depleted and are able to supply a continuous source of clean energy.

articleRenewable EnergyRenewable energy comes from sources that will not be used up in our lifetimes, such as the sun and wind.339

Renewable energy comes from sources that will not be used up in our lifetimes, such as the sun and wind.

articlePower PlanIceland uses geothermal energy to provide water and heat to residents.68

Iceland uses geothermal energy to provide water and heat to residents.

collectionVolcanoAccording to the United States Geologic Survey, there are approximately 1,500 potentially active volcanoes worldwide. Most are located around the Pacific Ocean in what is commonly called the Ring of Fire. A volcano is defined as an opening in Earth's crust through which lava, ash, and gases erupt. The term also includes the cone-shaped landform built by repeated eruptions over time.323

According to the United States Geologic Survey, there are approximately 1,500 potentially active volcanoes worldwide. Most are located around the Pacific Ocean in what is commonly called the Ring of Fire. A volcano is defined as an opening in Earth's crust through which lava, ash, and gases erupt. The term also includes the cone-shaped landform built by repeated eruptions over time.

collectionThermodynamicsIn its common usage, the word heat refers to both thermal energy and its transfer from a warmer object to a cooler object. Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that studies heat transfer between systems. This field has observed the laws of thermodynamics which define how heat, within a system, flows and does work. In any system, when two objects with different temperatures are brought into contact with one another, they will eventually establish thermodynamic equilibrium. As heat moves from one object to the other, physical changes will take place: the balloon filled with gas will grow or shrink, the roadway will expand or contract, the electrical resistance in the circuit will increase or decrease, and these changes are predictable and can be measured. Engineers and scientists take these laws into account when they design projects and experiments. Use these resources to learn more about thermodynamics.58

In its common usage, the word heat refers to both thermal energy and its transfer from a warmer object to a cooler object. Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that studies heat transfer between systems. This field has observed the laws of thermodynamics which define how heat, within a system, flows and does work. In any system, when two objects with different temperatures are brought into contact with one another, they will eventually establish thermodynamic equilibrium. As heat moves from one object to the other, physical changes will take place: the balloon filled with gas will grow or shrink, the roadway will expand or contract, the electrical resistance in the circuit will increase or decrease, and these changes are predictable and can be measured. Engineers and scientists take these laws into account when they design projects and experiments. Use these resources to learn more about thermodynamics.

National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, DC 20036

National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2025 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved.