@2022 - All Right Reserved. Designed and Developed by PenciDesign

Perovskite Solar Cell

Perovskite solar cells are a new type of solar cell that offer high efficiency and low cost. Perovskite solar cells are made from a material called perovskite, which is a type of mineral. The perovskite crystal structure was first discovered in the 19th century by the Russian mineralogist Lev Perovski. The name “perovskite” comes from the mineral’s resemblance to the calcium titanium oxide mineral known as perovskite.

Perovskites have since been found in many different forms, including in rocks, meteorites, and even in the human body. In recent years, however, scientists have begun to explore the use of perovskites for solar cells. Solar cells made from perovskites can be very thin and flexible, making them ideal for use on things like rooftops and even clothing. And because they are made from inexpensive materials, they hold great promise for large-scale deployment of solar energy.

Perovskite solar cells work by absorbing sunlight and converting it into electricity. The way they do this is similar to how traditional silicon-based solar cells work; however, instead of using silicon as the light-absorbing material, perovskite solar cells use a layer of light-absorbing organic molecules (called an absorber) sandwiched between two electrodes (a conductor). When sunlight hits the absorber layer, it creates an electric field that allows electrons to flow through the device and generate electricity.

One key advantage of perovskite solar cells is that they can be made much thinner than traditional silicon-based solar cells—as thin as one micrometer (one millionth of a meter). This means that they can be placed on top of existing structures without adding much weight or bulk. Additionally, because they are flexible, they can be mounted on curved surfaces like roofs or car hoods.

Another advantage of per

Leave a Comment Cancel Reply

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

Δdocument.getElementById( "ak_js_1" ).setAttribute( "value", ( new Date() ).getTime() );

1 Recent Findings: Brief Periods of Insomnia May Temporarily Alleviate Depression Symptoms 2 years ago

2 Tectonic Trouble: NASA Measures Sinking Land in American Samoa 2 years ago

3 Astrocytes: The Unsung Heroes of Stress Management 2 years ago

4 Deciphering SN 1006: Breakthroughs from Chandra and IXPE in Understanding an Ancient Supernova 2 years ago

5 Is Daylight Saving Time A Medical Nightmare? A Neurologist Breaks It Down 3 years ago

6 Want To Age Optimally? New Study Reveals the Power of Social Participation 2 years ago

7 Intellectual Capacities in Vocalization and Problem-Solving Correlate with Brain Size in European Starlings 2 years ago

8 Challenge Accepted: Conquer Your Issues With the Power of Chemical Engineering and Get Unmatched Results Fast 3 years ago

9 Stop The Clock: 10 Immediate Steps to Lessen The Impact of Global Warming Now! 3 years ago

Subscribe my Newsletter for new blog posts, tips & new photos. Let's stay updated!

Highlight in This Week

SciTechPost is a web resource dedicated to providing up-to-date information on the fast-paced world of science and technology. Our mission is to make science and technology accessible to everyone through our platform, by bringing together experts, innovators, and academics to share their knowledge and experience.

Useful Links About Us SciTechPedia

Subscribe my Newsletter for new blog posts, tips & new photos. Let's stay updated!

Keep me signed in until I sign out

Forgot your password?

A new password will be emailed to you.

Have received a new password? Login here