Your privacy, your choice

We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media, as well as to allow video information to be shared for both marketing, analytics and editorial purposes.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

Studies in the History of Philosophy of Mind

About this book series

The aim of the series Studies in the History of Philosophy of Mind is to foster historical research into the nature of thinking and the workings of the mind. The volumes address topics of intellectual history that would nowadays fall into different disciplines like philosophy of mind, philosophical psychology, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, etc. The monographs and collections of articles in the series are historically reliable as well as congenial to the contemporary reader. They provide original insights into central contemporary problems by looking at them in historical contexts, addressing issues like consciousness, representation and intentionality, mind and body, the self and the emotions. In this way, the books open up new perspectives for research on these topics.

This book series is indexed in SCOPUS.

Book titles in this series

The Sense of Touch Medieval and Modern Debates in Philosophy and Science Editors: Chiara BeneduceMattia MantovaniDenise Vincenti Copyright: 2026 Available Renditions Hard cover eBook

Medieval and Modern Debates in Philosophy and Science

Mind, Soul and the Cosmos in the High Middle Ages Editors: Jack P. CunninghamAdam FoxonRosamund M. Gammie Copyright: 2024 Available Renditions Hard cover eBook

Mind, Soul and the Cosmos in the High Middle Ages

Aristotle. On Youth and Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration 1-6 With Translation, Introduction and Interpretation Authors: Giouli Korobili Copyright: 2022 Available Renditions Hard cover Soft cover eBook

Aristotle. On Youth and Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration 1-6

With Translation, Introduction and Interpretation

Rethinking Descartes’s Substance Dualism Authors: Lynda Gaudemard Copyright: 2021 Available Renditions Hard cover Soft cover eBook

Rethinking Descartes’s Substance Dualism

Aristotelian Subjectivism: Francisco Suárez’s Philosophy of Perception Authors: Daniel Heider Copyright: 2021 Available Renditions Hard cover Soft cover eBook

Aristotelian Subjectivism: Francisco Suárez’s Philosophy of Perception

Abstracted and indexed in

Publish your research

Open access publishing

Products and services

Partners and advertisers

Your privacy choices/Manage cookies

Your US state privacy rights

Accessibility statement

Cancel contracts here