Programs Find a Program Leadership Certificates On Campus or Online?

Leadership Certificates

Programs for Organizations For Organizations Client Testimonials

Visit Plan Your Visit Explore One Brattle Square

Explore One Brattle Square

About About Us Our Participants at a Glance Success Stories Our Faculty Teaching Opportunities Events Contact Us

Our Participants at a Glance

Teaching Opportunities

Leadership Certificates

Programs for Organizations

Explore One Brattle Square

Our Participants at a Glance

Teaching Opportunities

Professional & Executive Development Blog

Managing Yourself and Leading Others

Ethics in AI: Why It Matters

As AI corporate usage ramps up, institutionalizing ethical systems and gut checks are becoming increasingly important.

Lizzie Short Lizzie Short is a writer, content strategist, and actor in NYC. She works as ghostwriter and content strategist developing thought leadership for CEOs on LinkedIn and writes about trending news topics for an HR newsletter. She also produces podcasts, acts for the stage and screen, and writes social media content.

Lizzie Short is a writer, content strategist, and actor in NYC. She works as ghostwriter and content strategist developing thought leadership for CEOs on LinkedIn and writes about trending news topics for an HR newsletter. She also produces podcasts, acts for the stage and screen, and writes social media content.

The Importance of AI Ethics

Ethical Challenges in AI

The Impact of AI on Employment

The Future of AI Ethics

Ready to dive deeper into AI?

While the uses of AI tools can seem unlimited, it’s critical that their expertise does not go unquestioned; AI tools are only as reliable as the data they’re trained on — and the people who build them.

Issues related to privacy, biases, and transparency remain paramount for building AI systems that are both ethical and accurate. As corporations continue to embed AI into their day-to-day processes, establishing frameworks ensuring AI applications are within legal and ethical bounds is increasingly important.

The Importance of AI Ethics

Understanding the ethical implications of AI is critical for leaders:

First, AI ethical literacy gives leaders an understanding of the potential issues AI could cause, allowing them to protect their companies from lawsuits and reputational damage.

Second, understanding AI ethics helps leaders build a holistic picture of the coming AI-Age, and the concomitant risks and opportunities.

AI ethics examines the societal implications of widespread AI usage around issues like fairness and privacy. It also explores how AI affects the environment and its potential impact on the workforce: AI data centers require more water resources than traditional data centers, and even AI innovators like Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei foresee widespread white-collar job loss, projecting that AI could replace 50 percent of all entry-level white-collar jobs within the next five years.

Understanding how ethical issues affect a business’ day-to-day operations, such as privacy-related issues, in addition to the broader implications of AI on the economy, the workforce, and the environment, will enable leaders to make informed and balanced decisions.

Ethical Challenges in AI

Leaders are facing a host of challenges when it comes to managing AI data and privacy, biases, transparency issues, and more.

Michael Impink, instructor of AI Ethics in Business at Harvard DCE’s Professional and Executive Development division, weighs in on how executives and business leaders can meet these challenges head-on.

“For leaders, awareness is the number one step,” Impink says. Once leaders know where ethical AI issues might exist, they can begin to generate solutions.”

But because AI is moving so quickly, there’s no clearly defined step-by-step process for resolving all ethical issues.

“AI is idiosyncratic to what you want it to do, so there’s no one-size-fits-all approach,” he adds.

Understanding the main ethical challenges AI presents — and creatively generating solutions — is mandatory for the leaders of tomorrow.

Want to learn more? Level up your AI expertise today

Explore Harvard’s P&ED Artificial Intelligence programs

Data privacy is paramount for most companies. Ensuring their customers’, patients’, or business’ proprietary information remains secure is mission-critical.

But AI creates other avenues for bad actors to gain access to a company’s sensitive information, potentially exposing the business to litigation. For example, businesses that collect Personal Identifying Information (PII) have a legal responsibility to keep that information secure. If PII is given to an AI tool, the tool needs to be secure from both external cyberattacks and any internal manipulation. It’s critical that leaders understand the risks posed by AI malware and develop internal cybersecurity systems to detect and mitigate AI threats.

Biases are one of the biggest ethical challenges for AI systems, but most business leaders miss the implications of biases on business outcomes.

Just like working with an inaccurate business model, a biased AI tool can lead to a host of poor outcomes: inaccurate predictions, litigation (if the biases are found to negatively impact a protected class, for example), and wrongheaded conclusions.

According to Impink, there are three main sources for biases in AI: The programmers, the algorithm, or the training data.

“The programmers creating the AI could be biased,” Impink says. “The algorithm could be biased, it could be overweighting something, or the bias could be something inherent in the algorithm. The training data itself could be biased, or these learning materials could be limiting some important information.”

AI Modeling Transparency and Explainability

In an era where AI systems increasingly shape business decisions in sectors like finance, healthcare, and education, humans need to understand the algorithmic priorities and rationales that drive AI decision-making. If an AI model denies a loan, flags a tumor, or prioritizes a job applicant, humans must be able to trace the reasoning behind that decision. An ethical application of AI tools necessitates deep human understanding to ensure that decisions are made fairly.

“If it becomes commonplace to use AI, the firms who use it ethically and responsibly will gain a competitive advantage,” Impink says. “The ones who don’t might have a harder time winning contracts or accessing data.”

Without a clear window into how AI arrives at its conclusions, businesses run the risk of creating so-called “black-box” systems where the algorithms automating decisions are inscrutable to employees managing the systems.

When decisions become biased or limit opportunities for recourse, current inequalities are likely to be reinforced and public trust in businesses or AI tools could degrade rapidly. If people begin to feel that AI algorithms are making life-altering decisions in ways even experts can’t explain, they’re likely to lose trust in those institutions and tools.

If it becomes commonplace to use AI, the firms who use it ethically and responsibly will gain a competitive advantage.

The Impact of AI on Employment

The rise of AI in the workplace presents a complex ethical challenge for the global job market. On one hand, AI promises to automate repetitive tasks, boost productivity, and unlock entirely new industries. On the other, the speed of AI adoption threatens white-collar jobs across industries and roles, from software engineers to copywriters, sales reps to HR associates.

Historically, big waves of technological change have led to increased economic productivity. Proponents of AI argue that these periods freed workers from low-wage, rote work and delivered them to higher-value, more interesting work — and the AI revolution will do the same.

However, it’s unclear what new roles will be created, and what new training or upskilling opportunities will be available to prepare workers for new positions. As the speed of AI development and adoption increases, there’s a risk that development will outpace retraining.

Governments may need to step in to support this major transition within the workforce through a provision for Universal Basic Income (UBI).

“We might see people working 30 hours a week and receiving some form of UBI. But we’re not there yet — we haven’t seen the productivity gains,” Impink says.

But widespread AI use could also create new jobs. AI-experts in different fields will likely be in high-demand in the coming years.

As AI technology becomes more widespread, international bodies are recognizing the need for global coordination to address challenges and risks while also distributing and maximizing benefits. For example, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) issued its OECD AI Principles, designed to promote an innovative yet trustworthy use of AI that respects democratic norms.

Similarly, the United Nations Secretary-General has established a board of 39 experts from various disciplines to act as a High-Level Advisory Body on AI. By engaging stakeholders that include governments, the private sector, and society at-large, the board will recommend strategies for international AI governance that respects human rights and helps meet sustainable development goals.

Building a Responsible AI Framework: 5 Key Principles for Organizations

How to Keep Up with AI Through Reskilling

What’s the Future of AI in Business?

AI Will Shape the Future of Marketing

Today’s Regulatory Landscape for AI

The AI regulatory landscape is rapidly evolving in the United States. The Trump Administration’s sweeping tax and spending package includes an unusual and hotly debated proviso — no state AI regulations for 10 years. In the most recent version of the bill, states that pass regulations on AI models and systems wouldn’t be able to access the $500 million in federal funds earmarked for AI infrastructure and deployment.

Further afield, the European Union passed the EU AI Act, presenting a comprehensive framework for classifying AI tools based on the risks they present to users. Regulations are applied based on risk level, with AI applications deemed high risk subject to greater scrutiny and more regulations. High risk AI applications include those that impact safety (such as AI used in aviation or medical devices) or fundamental rights (such as AI used in law enforcement, educational training, and more).

While AI regulation in the US is up for debate, US firms with a global footprint using AI may still find themselves facing regulations:

“The E.U. regulates the developed world,” Impink says. “U.S. firms adhere to E.U. regulations if they want to work internationally, so everyone really follows Europe.”

The Future of AI Ethics

To some, AI seems like a fad. Free, public-facing LLMs like ChatGPT and Claude regularly make mistakes and aren’t up-to-date on the latest news and trends, leading some to underestimate the power of this technology.

However, internal AI systems are more powerful than publicly available LLMs and can become ever-more refined through specific prompting. As development continues — to the point where AI systems are developing themselves and other systems — reliability concerns will drop. However, more sophisticated AI systems raise other concerns, like the possibility of superintelligence and what that could mean for the workforce and society.

Is Superintelligence A Possibility?

A.I. superintelligence — an AI system whose intelligence surpasses that of humans — is a hotly debated subject. Some experts believe we’ll see superintelligence by the end of the decade, and others say that it will probably never happen. But what exactly is AI superintelligence?

AI superintelligence refers to systems that exceed human intelligence and can autonomously learn and innovate beyond their initial programming.

“Personally, I don’t think it’s possible,” Impink says. Because A.I. tools are trained on human materials and iterated upon by human prompting, “there’s some level of creativity it won’t be able to reach.”

Ready to dive deeper into AI?

As AI transforms the workforce, leaders need tailored training to stay up-to-date. Harvard’s Department of Continuing Education offers several courses related to artificial intelligence to support business leaders as they use AI to drive business success.

As businesses implement AI into their workflows, systems, and teams, establishing ethical processes around data privacy, fairness, and transparency is critical for success. Companies that pursue an ethical approach to AI are likely to avoid litigation and preserve their brand reputation.

Register for AI Ethics in Business today

5 Skills Corporate Strategy Leaders Value

Learn about the five key skills in demand for effective corporate strategy.

Managing Yourself and Leading Others

Evolve your leadership style to become the leader you want to be — the leader only you can be.

Join us on campus December 10–11.

Follow Professional & Executive Development | Harvard DCE

Harvard Division of Continuing Education

The Division of Continuing Education (DCE) at Harvard University is dedicated to bringing rigorous academics and innovative teaching capabilities to those seeking to improve their lives through education. We make Harvard education accessible to lifelong learners from high school to retirement.

Harvard Extension School Harvard degrees, certificates and courses—online, in the evenings, and at your own pace.

Harvard Extension School

Harvard degrees, certificates and courses—online, in the evenings, and at your own pace.

Harvard Summer School Academic summer opportunities for adult, college and high school students—at Harvard and abroad.

Harvard Summer School

Academic summer opportunities for adult, college and high school students—at Harvard and abroad.

Harvard Professional & Executive Development Short, intensive programs to develop skills and strengthen your professional profile.

Harvard Professional & Executive Development

Short, intensive programs to develop skills and strengthen your professional profile.

Harvard Institute for Learning in Retirement Peer learning in the liberal arts—a community program for retired and semi-retired professionals.

Harvard Institute for Learning in Retirement

Peer learning in the liberal arts—a community program for retired and semi-retired professionals.

Digital Accessibility Policy

Copyright ©2025 President and Fellows of Harvard College

Privacy Preference Center

Manage Consent Preferences

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

These cookies are set by a range of social media services that we have added to the site to enable you to share our content with your friends and networks. They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites and building up a profile of your interests. This may impact the content and messages you see on other websites you visit. If you do not allow these cookies you may not be able to use or see these sharing tools.

Back Button Performance Cookies

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies and similar technologies on your device to provide online services, enhance the performance and functionality of our services, analyze the use of our website, and assist with our advertising and marketing efforts, in accordance with the Harvard Division of Continuing EducationPrivacy Statement.