Topics Carbon Capture Coal Cybersecurity Data Centers Distributed Energy Energy Storage Environmental Gas Geothermal Hydro Hydrogen Legal & Regulatory Nuclear O&M Safety Smart Grid Solar Technology T&D Waste to Energy Water Wind Workforce

Events Experience POWER Data Center POWER eXchange Industry Events POWER Awards Webinars

Data Center POWER eXchange

Resources POWER Plant ID Videos Podcasts Newsletters White Papers BrandConnect Interactive Features Press Releases Blog Store Jobs

Issues POWER Magazine POWER News Renewable POWER Direct Nuclear POWER Direct Hydrogen POWER Direct T&D POWER Direct Coal POWER Direct Gas POWER Direct Archive

Renewable POWER Direct

Hydrogen POWER Direct

Subscribe Subscribe E-Letter Signup

Data Center POWER eXchange

Renewable POWER Direct

Hydrogen POWER Direct

Privacy Policy, Terms & Conditions

Diversity, Equity, Inclusion & Belonging

Please contact our Customer Service Team if you are unable to log in at clientservices@accessintel.com or 1-888-707-5814.

Perovskite Solar Cells: What They Are and Why They Matter

Perovskite solar cells are a high-efficiency, low-cost alternative to traditional silicon-based solar panels. With the perovskite solar cell industry expected to reach $1.2 billion by 2033, there’s enormous potential for this next-generation technology.

The Basics of Perovskites

Perovskites are a type of material, with a distinctive crystal structure described as ABX3 (Figure 1). These crystals occur naturally in the form of calcium titanate, but this mineral has few practical uses.

Replicating this structure with specific combinations of organic and inorganic materials can create a perovskite semiconductor. These synthetic perovskites, depending on the atoms in the structure, have an impressive array of interesting properties. Certain perovskites are excellent at absorbing sunlight and converting it into electrical energy, and this is what they are known for in the solar industry.

Perovskites vs. Silicon

In some ways, perovskites are even better at absorbing sunlight than silicon, which currently dominates 95% of the commercial solar panel market. What makes perovskites particularly exciting for researchers is the rapid advancement in their solar cell efficiency. Since 2009, the maximum efficiency of perovskite solar cells has risen from 3.9% to 30.1%—it took 37 years for crystalline silicon solar cells to achieve comparable efficiencies.

While silicon is currently the standard, it is not an ideal solar material, as it has an indirect bandgap. You cannot significantly change its material properties, so the only solution is to use a relatively thick layer of silicon, making sure as much light as possible is absorbed. This means silicon solar panels are traditionally large, rigid, and heavy. On the other hand, researchers can tune the properties of perovskites to have an optimal bandgap for sunlight absorbance. With careful material selection and device engineering, perovskites can efficiently absorb sunlight even when coated in very thin layers, often below micrometer-level thicknesses. With these thin layers, perovskite solar cells are lightweight, can be made on flexible substrates, and can even be used in semi-transparent solar panels.

The Risk of Political Rebranding in the Clean Energy Industry

‘World’s Largest’ Energy Storage Site Approved as Part of California Solar Project

XGS Energy, Meta Partner for 150-MW Advanced Geothermal Project

The Great Shift: Navigating the Global Energy Transition

IRA Incentives Fuel U.S. Solar Manufacturing Surge

The Risk of Political Rebranding in the Clean Energy Industry

‘World’s Largest’ Energy Storage Site Approved as Part of California Solar Project

XGS Energy, Meta Partner for 150-MW Advanced Geothermal Project

The Great Shift: Navigating the Global Energy Transition

IRA Incentives Fuel U.S. Solar Manufacturing Surge

The Risk of Political Rebranding in the Clean Energy Industry

Renewables Utilities, Grid Operators Grapple with Adding Renewable Energy

Utilities, Grid Operators Grapple with Adding Renewable Energy

Renewables Fervo Energy Sets Record with New Enhanced Geothermal Well

Fervo Energy Sets Record with New Enhanced Geothermal Well

Renewables A First for India: GE Vernova Commissions Pumped Storage Unit at Hydro Complex

A First for India: GE Vernova Commissions Pumped Storage Unit at Hydro Complex

Solar AT&T Signs PPA For Output from New 130-MW Texas Solar Farm

AT&T Signs PPA For Output from New 130-MW Texas Solar Farm

Legal & Regulatory Tariff Tempest: Renewables’ Route Through the Current Tariff Climate

Tariff Tempest: Renewables’ Route Through the Current Tariff Climate

Renewables Perovskite Solar Cells: What They Are and Why They Matter

Perovskite Solar Cells: What They Are and Why They Matter

Renewables ACCIONA Energía Brings 280-MW Wind Farm Online in Canada

ACCIONA Energía Brings 280-MW Wind Farm Online in Canada

Solar AES, Meta Sign PPAs for 650 MW of Solar Power in Kansas and Texas

AES, Meta Sign PPAs for 650 MW of Solar Power in Kansas and Texas

In their production, perovskite solar cells can be entirely solution processed. This means that they can be made with scalable methods like slot-die coating (Figure 2) and ink jet printing. These techniques are much cheaper and produce less waste than the processing of silicon. Large-scale perovskite solar cells have the potential to be cost-effective compared to the dominant silicon solar technology.

Challenges of Perovskites

Despite their promise, as solar materials, perovskites are still presented with some key challenges. Most notably, they are susceptible to degradation when exposed to moisture, heat, and light—all necessary factors for solar panels to do their job.

Moisture. Humidity can cause rapid degradation of perovskite films, especially those including methylammonium iodide. The organic components in the perovskite are very hygroscopic. When water molecules interact with these components, they form weak hydrogen bonds that compromise the structural stability of the crystal. At first, these changes are reversible, but with enough moisture penetration, the perovskite crystal irreversibly decomposes. This breakdown can set off a chain reaction that creates more water, worsening the degradation.

Illumination. While light is obviously essential for solar cells to function, it can also contribute to degradation. Constant exposure to light can speed up chemical reactions and ion movement within the material. In mixed halide perovskites, light can cause different halide components to separate, which reduces voltage and efficiency. The effect of ultraviolet (UV) light on perovskite solar cell stability is most significant when combined with other environmental factors.

Temperature. Exposure to high temperatures can lower the efficiency of solar cells by affecting their internal properties. In perovskites, heat can increase defect formation and accelerate unwanted chemical reactions. Compared to silicon solar cells (which lose about 0.5% efficiency per degree Celsius increase), perovskite cells are even more sensitive to heat, making temperature management crucial during both fabrication and operation.

Other Hazards. The presence of lead in perovskite compounds is also problematic. Though it is used in much smaller quantities than those currently present in either lead- or cadmium-based batteries, concerns still remain about toxic lead compounds entering the environment. Within research there is disagreement about how much of an issue this will be for commercial perovskite solar panels. Some studies have suggested large-scale implementation of perovskites would require complete containment of degradation products. In contrast, other lifecycle assessments have found the toxicity impact of lead to be negligible in comparison to other materials used in the cell.

Next Steps for Perovskites

Although perovskite solar cells have reached impressively high efficiencies, these results are typically achieved in controlled lab environments. To push perovskites out of the lab, academic and industrial researchers are working hard to find perovskites with better intrinsic stability; improve encapsulation techniques (Figure 3), which protect the solar cells from environmental factors; and develop trial additives that improve perovskite stability.

One of the most effective strategies has been adjusting the materials used in the perovskite structure. For example, mixing different cations has helped to boost both stability and efficiency. In fact, the first perovskite cells to surpass 20% efficiency used a mixed organic cation system, and today’s top-performing devices often include inorganic components.

Researchers have also had success with new surface passivation techniques, which improve charge transfer at the perovskite surface. For example, 2D perovskites, which are designed to form 2D sheets rather than a bulk crystal structure, tend to be more stable than 3D perovskites, but they perform less efficiently. Combining them with 3D perovskites helps maximize both performance and longevity. A recent study using these cutting-edge passivation techniques showed perovskite solar cells can last beyond 4,500 hours under normal working conditions with minimal performance loss, and with less than 5% efficiency drop under a 1,050-hour damp heat test—important milestones toward commercial viability.

One exciting application within reach is perovskites in tandem solar cells. In September 2024, Oxford PV announced the first commercial sale of a perovskite-on-silicon solar panel. By stacking multiple solar materials, a tandem solar cell can capture more of the solar spectrum and achieve higher efficiencies than a single layer. The bandgap of a perovskite can be easily tuned by changing the perovskite composition, meaning that it can be paired with other solar materials, such as silicon. Perovskites can more efficiently use smaller wavelengths of the sun’s spectrum, so the efficiency of a silicon solar cell can be improved by depositing a perovskite solar cell on top. Perovskite-silicon tandem devices have achieved efficiencies of up to 31.3%, which is significantly higher than either crystalline silicon or perovskite solar cells individually.

Why Perovskites Matter?

Solar power is a cornerstone of the global shift toward renewable energy, which itself is an essential strategy for combating climate change and improving energy access. However, the limitations of traditional silicon-based solar panels can restrict their use in more innovative or complex applications. To expand the potential of solar energy, alternative materials must be explored. Perovskites, despite some unresolved challenges, offer significant promise. Their remarkable properties, coupled with low-cost and scalable manufacturing methods, could make solar panels more affordable, widely accessible, and more versatile.

—Imogen Pass is scientific content collaborator at Ossila. She writes articles that make science accessible with the knowledge and help of Ossila’s academic and industry experts. Ossila specializes in lab equipment and materials that are used in solar cell and display technology research, driving the development of higher efficiency solar panels, flexible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) screens, wearable solar-powered devices, battery technologies, and more.

July 9, 2025 Creating Value from Data: Maximizing Plant Performance Through Real-Time Analytics Modern process industries are experiencing fluctuating market conditions and tight operational margins, leading chemical engineers to rely on real-time data to boost efficiency and reduce costs. Yet, many organizations are at different stages in their digital transformation journey. Some are just starting, while others are looking to optimize existing solutions. This webinar explores practical ways […] REGISTER Sponsored by dataPARC

Creating Value from Data: Maximizing Plant Performance Through Real-Time Analytics

Modern process industries are experiencing fluctuating market conditions and tight operational margins, leading chemical engineers to rely on real-time data to boost efficiency and reduce costs. Yet, many organizations are at different stages in their digital transformation journey. Some are just starting, while others are looking to optimize existing solutions. This webinar explores practical ways […]

Sponsored by dataPARC

June 16, 2025 Smart MRO: Using Technology and Assessment to Enhance Power Plant Performance REGISTER Sponsored by RENTECH

Smart MRO: Using Technology and Assessment to Enhance Power Plant Performance

May 20, 2025 How One Electric Utility Is Using AI and Extreme Weather Modeling to Make Critical Grid Decisions REGISTER Sponsored by technosylva

How One Electric Utility Is Using AI and Extreme Weather Modeling to Make Critical Grid Decisions

Sponsored by technosylva

descriptions off, selected

captions settings, opens captions settings dialog

captions off, selected

This is a modal window.

Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window.

End of dialog window.

Former FERC Chair Mark Christie opened the inaugural Data Center POWER eXchange on October 28, 2025 with a keynote framing the $2-trillion infrastructure challenges at the intersection of power and digital growth. At an industry turning point where AI-driven demand is straining infrastructure, Christie laid out the reliability, market design, and cost-allocation stakes for utilities, […]

archives + podcasts + webinars + e-letters + video + exclusive content + events + much more!

For over 142 years, POWER has been the unwavering pillar of the power and energy industry, offering unparalleled insights on the latest trends, best practices, and news through our robust channels: print, digital media, and in-person events.

Winter Reliability Concerns Spur Fresh DOE Intervention for PJM, MISO

UK Confirms Wylfa as Launch Site for First Nuclear SMR Fleet

Research Group: U.S. Exits Coal by 2040 as Solar, Nuclear, Natural Gas Surge

Siemens and Samsung C&T Partner to Drive Next-Generation Infrastructure Projects

Blackstone Investing $1.2 Billion for 600-MW Gas-Fired Plant in West Virginia

New Technologies Could Improve Solar Cell Efficiencies

Advancements in Solar Products and Their Role in Mitigating Carbon Emissions

Study: Perovskite-Silicon Tandems Provide Big Boost to Solar Efficiency

Analysis of Performance Degradation of PV Modules

News & Technology for the Global Energy Industry

POWER is at the forefront of the global power market, providing in-depth news and insight on the end-to-end electricity system and the ongoing energy transition. We strive to be the “go-to” resource for power professionals, offering a wealth of information on innovative business practices, sound safety measures, useful productivity enhancements, and much more.

descriptions off, selected

captions settings, opens captions settings dialog

captions off, selected

This is a modal window.

Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window.

End of dialog window.

Oct 29 — Oct 31, 2025 Hyatt Regency Denver, ColoradoDenver, CO

Privacy Policy, Terms & Conditions

Diversity, Equity, Inclusion & Belonging

Trends, best practices, and news through: print, digital media, and in-person events. Subscribe

Exclusive E-letters to POWER up your knowledge. Sign up

© 2025 Access Intelligence, LLC - All Rights Reserved