Buy the Current Issue

Explore the Digital Archive

What was the Industrial Revolution?

Over the 18th and 19th centuries Britain’s economy, technology, and society were transformed by the so-called Industrial Revolution. Why?

‘Industrial organisation defines people’s lives’

Judy Z. Stephenson is Professor of the Economic History of the Built Environment at the Bartlett, UCL

The Industrial Revolution was a profound crisis and upheaval in industrial organisation, or the way people work. This is a far more useful description than any which emphasise the shift away from agrarian production, or the growth of capitalism, or a ‘wave of gadgets’, or the mass exploitation of a new energy source. The economies of northwestern Europe had advanced beyond the agrarian well before the late 18th century, T.S. Ashton’s ‘gadgets’ started during the late Renaissance (with lots of capital), and coal was already used intensively, too. It is only with the organisation of the movement and production of large volumes of goods using new technology in big workplaces over regular hours that the real revolution began.

To continue reading this article you need to purchase a subscription, available from only £5.

Start my trial subscription now

If you have already purchased access, or are a print & archive subscriber, please ensure you are logged in.

Please email digital@historytoday.com if you have any problems.

Books of the Year 2025: Part 1

The Secret to Successful Medieval Movies

‘The Maginot Line’ by Kevin Passmore review

‘Christianity at the Crossroads’ by David N. Hempton review

Books of the Year 2024: Part 1

© Copyright 2025 History Today Ltd. Company no. 1556332.

We Value Your Privacy

Privacy Preference Centre

Manage Consent Preferences

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.