Searching for Meaning

The Existential Primeropen menu About the Primer

Introductionopen menu History and Existentialism Before Existentialism Existential Ethics Faith and Existentialism Existential Psychology Art and Philosophy Beyond Existentialism

History and Existentialism

Before Existentialism

Faith and Existentialism

Existential Psychology

Beyond Existentialism

The Indvidualsopen menu Simone de Beauvoir Franz Kafka Søren Kierkegaard Friedrich Nietzsche Jean-Paul Sartre

Reformatting Resumes after 18 Months

Existential Primer Resurrected

History and Existentialism

Most of the books I own on existentialism were published between 1955 and 1975. The peak interest in existentialism, therefore, seems to have overlapped a time of social upheaval in Europe. For this reason, I have created an outline of the Historical Context underlying existentialism. A brief philosophical context is presented here.

From 1945 to the 1960s was its heyday, as popular versions of it chimed perfectly with increasing individualism and the concomitant anti-establishment attitudes of those decades, particularly with the counter-culture movements of the Beats in the 1950s and the hippy movement of the 1960s, once it had moved outside mainland Europe.

— Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed; Earnshaw, p. 9

While there are American and British men and women associated with existentialism, generally the roots of existentialism are found in Continental Europe. Though existentialism continues to influence philosophy, literature, and the arts, it is primarily a historical grouping. Some scholars do embrace existentialism as timeless and universal, but this is increasingly a minority view of all philosophy.

To describe existentialism as an expression of an age… is to suggest that its claims could be only temporarily and locally valid. But if the accounts of the distinctiveness of human existence, of the inter-dependence of mind and world, of our existential freedom and so on are true at all, they are true of human beings at all times and in all places. These accounts, furthermore, stem from reflections on the perennial condition of human beings, and not the particular situation obtaining in post-war Europe. Existentialism, in other words, belongs to philosophy, not to the social sciences.

— Existentialism: A Reconstruction; Cooper, p. 13

Most current scholarship suggests philosophical schools are context-based, historically grounded by time and culture. The major figures of existentialism are associated with nineteenth- and twentieth-century Europe.

Those most often associated with existentialism did not set out to create a cohesive philosophical discipline based on some manner of formalized existential theories. Existentialism, while taught at universities, cannot point to leaders in the same way idealism or rationalism can. As you read the works of “existentialists” you come to see divisions and paradoxes not only between individuals, but within the works of many of the thinkers. Scholars even disagree on which men and women belong to existentialism.

Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche are forerunners of existentialism. If we want to thank (or blame) two figures for radical individualism, we could start with them. There were others before Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, but most texts on existentialism firmly place them at the foundation. Radical individualism is not existentialism, however. More importantly, Nietzsche believed our natures dictated some of our choices and Kierkegaard’s faith in a omniscient Creator imposed limits on free will. These men were dedicated to social order, but resisted the dominant political and intellectual powers of their days.

Existentialism exists within two important contexts: the history of philosophy and the history of humanity. Existentialism appears radical compared to other schools of thought, but it borrows from previous philosophical schools. Just as important, existentialism developed in the face of absurdity: European wars and suffering during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

The Continental tradition, to which existentialism belongs, embraces history and its effects on humanity, while at the same time rejecting any deterministic quality to history. We are free to reject, change, and forge new histories.

Once the human being has been located as a finite subject embedded in an ultimately contingent network of history, culture, and society, then one can begin to understand a feature common to many philosophers in the Continental tradition, namely the demand that things be otherwise. If human experience is a contingent creation, then it can be recreated in other ways. This is the demand for a transformative practice of philosophy, art, poetry, or thinking that would be capable of addressing, criticizing, and ultimately redeeming the present. The demand, then, that runs through much Continental thought and which continues to inspire philosophers like Habermas and Derrida, is that human beings emancipate themselves from their current conditions, which are conditions not amenable to freedom.

— Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction; Simon Critchley, p. 64

This document emphasized the general historical context of existentialism, not the philosophical context. The Introduction to Existentialism addresses the philosophical context of existentialism.

Evolution of a Philosophy

It has been stated that existentialism is uniquely suited to the twentieth century, as if somehow mankind reached a new level of cynicism during the previous century. After all, that is how most view existentialism: a philosophy without hope, without faith. The reality is more complex. Existentialism evolved as a school of philosophy, borrowing from others, while never completely rejecting past ideals.

The idea of writing the history of philosophy with a systematic, argumentative intent has been a very common way of proceeding in the Continental tradition since Hegel’s 1807 masterpiece, Phenomenology of Spirit, which unifies both approaches. One can also find the same approach employed in more contemporary work, such as Jürgen Habermas’s Knowledge and Human Interests (1968), Foucault’s Madness and Civilization (1961), and Derrida’s Of Grammatology (1967). It is much less common in the Anglo-American tradition.

— Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction; Critchley, p. 32

As with most “modern” philosophies, any student of existentialism must begin with Immanuel Kant, the father of German Idealism. Kant’s works gave rise to Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling, and Georg W. F. Hegel. These three successors of Kant — Fichte, Shelling, and Hegel — each attempted to defend faith as logical. These men were influenced by the rise of scientific pursuits and found it necessary to make sense of faith in a Creator. Hegel became the symbol of this philosophical quest to make religious faith reasonable.

Søren Kierkegaard rose to prominence by attacking Hegel, or at least the tradition of defending religious faith as logical. Kierkegaard insisted faith was not logical — and the lack of reason was acceptable. It cannot be “faith” if one tries to establish a logical foundation for religion, according to Kierkegaard. He then went on to define the essence of existentialism: humans suffer a deep anxiety because they cannot be certain of anything, of any meaning. The concepts of anxiety and alienation meld neatly with the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche.

Nietzsche represents what has been called “radical free will” — not only is there no logic to existence, but the truly strong person rises and masters the absurdity of life. For many students, and much of the public, Nietzsche’s words define not only existentialism but also nihilism. Yet Nietzsche does not represent existentialism as it was later defined by Jean-Paul Sartre.

Sartre’s existentialism drew from Martin Heidegger, who in turn based much of his work upon those of his mentor, Edmund Husserl, the father of phenomenology. As existentialism was formalized by Sartre, one finds the logic of phenomenology with some Hegelian overtones merged with the radical individualism found in Nietzsche. Existentialism is a paradox, as Sartre came to describe it: an attempt to live logically in a universe that is ultimately absurd. Though “existential” scholars often deny it, without Hegel or the rush to science during the nineteenth century, Sartre’s existentialism would not exist.

How much should Existentialism be regarded and perhaps judged as a social movement? It is unusual for a philosophy to attract so directly a following for its ideas from people who would perhaps otherwise have no interest in philosophy. The typical image of an Existentialist as clad all in black, drinking coffee and smoking on the Paris Left bank has endured, though by all accounts the emergence of the stereotypical Existential figure was something of a surprise to de Beauvoir and other Existentialists of the time (MacDonald, 2000: 5). From 1945 to the 1960s was its heyday, as popular versions of it chimed perfectly with increasing individualism and the concomitant anti-establishment attitudes of those decades, particularly with the counter-culture movements of the Beats in the 1950s and the hippy movement of the 1960s, once it had moved outside mainland Europe.

— Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed; Steven Earnshaw, pp. 8-9

History and Tradition

Husserl and Heidegger both called on their readers to remember history and tradition. However, this was not meant to be empty nostalgia for European history. Instead, this was a call to critically examine and reflect upon the history of Europe. The evaluation of history and cultural traditions should be a confrontation with our histories, potentially (and likely) an uncomfortable experience. We should see the flaws of our philosophical, political, and cultural histories. This recall is not a conservative effort to preserve history, but a radical effort to reform the present and future.

… a critical conception of tradition is what Heidegger calls the Destruktion (de-structuring) or Abbau (dismantling) of the history of metaphysics, words that the young Derrida sought to render into French as deconstruction…

Tradition can be said to have two senses.

1. As something inherited or handed down without questioning or critical interrogation.

2. As something made or produced through a critical engagement with the first sense of tradition, as an appeal to tradition that is in no way traditional, a radical tradition.

It is this second sense of tradition that is shared… by Husserl and Heidegger. For the later Husserl of the posthumously published Crisis of the European Sciences (1954), the two senses of tradition correspond to the distinction between a sedimented and a reactivated experience of tradition. […] For Husserl, sedimentation consists in the forgetfulness of the origin of a state of affairs.

— Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction; Critchley, p. 69

We must not romanticize history or tradition. Instead, we should recall history precisely, especially the worst aspects of our histories. This applies to science, philosophy, and geopolitical histories. No “memory” of history should be trusted, no account assumed to be reliable. History is a creation, an interpretation of events that must be incomplete and inaccurate because it is a human creation.

World History (Political)

Culturally, there are two major groups of existentialists: the German-Danish and French-Anglo. In addition, the Jewish and Russian cultures have contributed to the philosophy. Many would argue Russian history might be as existential as any work of fiction. The German and French nations have experienced brutal wars (often against each other), plagues, and other sources of misery. The philosophical movement now known as existentialism can be traced from 1789 through 1986, when Simone de Beauvoir died. After experiencing numerous civil disturbances, localized wars, and two world-wide wars, some people in Europe were bound to conclude that life is inherently miserable and irrational. If war is not absurd, nothing is.

Industrial Revolution

For an overview of the early Industrial Revolution and its lasting effects, I suggest T. S. Ashton’s The Industrial Revolution, 1760-1830.

The Industrial Revolution altered society in ways we are still attempting to address. From automation to urbanization, the Industrial Revolution altered how we live our lives. It brought us into larger and larger cities, removing us from small, tight-knit communities with deep familial roots. The pace of change, socially and technologically, proved difficult for humanity. We still are adapting, while advancements continue to risk leaving us more alienated from our physical communities.

For Nietzsche, writing In the second half of the nineteenth century, the human race had become decadent and weak. The descent of Western civilization into decadence was a common sentiment in that period, and his writings proposed how a ‘will to power’ could prove a counter to this negative attitude. […]

For some commentators these views might be explained historically as reactions to industrialization, the ever-growing atomization of society into little more than unthinking work-units.

— Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed; Earnshaw, p. 20

The Industrial Revolution’s first stage (1760–1830) ended at a time of social upheaval in Europe. Germany was about to unite under Otto von Bismarck, through a series of orchestrated conflicts. Hegel died in 1831, but his works were influential throughout the second movement of the Industrial Revolution, which lasted until approximately 1905.

In the United Kingdom, Queen Victoria’s reign (1837–1901) marked the second half of the Industrial Revolution, when automation and technology in general captured the public imagination.

Great and Terrible Wars

After two world wars, major conflicts in Asia, and uprising throughout the Middle East and Africa, a generational embrace of a philosophy associated with absurdity might be viewed as inevitable. The psychological affect of turmoil in Europe shaped Continental philosophy in general, and existentialism in particular.

Nor should we forget that after the First World War and again after the Second World War, the question of what could possibly constitute the human race after these catastrophic events was very much to the fore, and so the Existentialism of Sartre and Camus, and the thinking of Heidegger, can sometimes be seen as responses to these major events.

— Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed; Earnshaw, p. 20

For Sartre, the experience of World War II was transformational. This is not to suggest that everyone in Europe was not affected by the war; surely everyone was affected and many survivors were permanently traumatized. Sartre reevaluated his previous statements on philosophy and literature. After the war, he publicly moved towards Marxism and socialism and away from existentialism. He viewed political activism as a duty after the war.

The experience of the Second World War had given Sartre a sense of social responsibility that, arguably, was lacking or at least ill-developed in his masterpiece, Being and Nothingness (1943). In fact, the existentialists had generally been criticized for their excessive individualism and apparent lack of social conscience.

— Existentialism: A Very Short Introduction; Thomas R. Flynn, p. 13

The Korean and Vietnam conflicts followed World War II. The absurdity merely continued, despite the obvious horrors of war. There was little new to express about the recklessness of humanity. If anything, we seemed destined to repeat our mistakes until our eventual demise.

Though some suggest that there are modern existential philosophers, they clearly are not prominent figures. In my research, by no means exhaustive since I am one person, I do not know of any major advancements to the school since the 1980s, and that is being generous. Scholars suggest existentialism’s greatest works and lectures were completed by the mid-1940s and everything else is a response to or promotion of those works.

… [W]hat are now considered the major texts had all been published by 1943 with Sartre’s Being and Nothingness, or by 1946 if his Existentialism and Humanism is included.

— Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed; Earnshaw, p. 9.

As I have written in the general introduction, most scholars of philosophy and literature consider existentialism to have been a product of historical events. Though the existentialists sought to find universal “truths” in their experiences (Cooper, p. 13), they are forever associated with the tumult of European upheavals, two world wars, and major geopolitical shifts. Even the scholars resistant to the impulse to cordon off existentialsm admit it is perceived as a symbol of a certain period.

The existentialists’ urge for contemporary relevance fired their social and political commitment. But it also linked them with the problems of their day and invited subsequent generations to view them as having the currency of yesterday’s news.

— Existentialism: A Very Short Introduction; Flynn, preface (p. i)

Today, several individuals are exploring existential psychoanalysis and existential fiction, but they are lacking major influence upon philosophy in general. Though the world is not at peace, existentialism is no longer viewed as offering one of the better explanations for the absurdity of human events. Philosophy has continued to advance, as the Continental tradition suggests it must.

This timeline is primarily European, as Europe is the birthplace of Continental philosophy and existentialism.

Germany’s history can be viewed as contributing to the evolution of existential thought. Browsing a good history book, it becomes clear that Germany has been attacked and has attacked… repeatedly. The German culture is shaped by war, from Germanic tribal feuds through the Cold War. However, it is the period from 1871 through World War II that shaped most existential thought.

The timeline represents only a fraction of the events within the borders we now know as Germany. The individual most responsible for the rise and fall of Germany during the period outlined is Otto von Bismarck. In order to control Germany from 1862 through 1890, he found enemies first in other nations. Then, once he believed Germany had a reasonable amount of territory, he found liberals and socialists to persecute. To many cynics, it seemed as if Bismarck had no real political ideals, other than the illusion that he alone should rule Germany.

As you might observe in the timeline, Nietzsche and Kierkegaard experienced the rise of a great German culture. Bismarck did bring amazing prosperity to Germany via both war and solid trade policies, which penalized imports in a world market that wanted German goods. Nietzsche’s idea of the superman, a man operating in life with a pure desire for power and excellence, was shaped by Bismarck’s Germany. Hitler would later pervert the philosophical debating point into a belief system.

World War II is the defining event in the history of French existentialism. Before the second war, the French had prided their country as one of the world powers. With expansive colonies, a rich history, and a victorious end to World War I, the French dared to consider their country safe and secure.

A summary of French-German history is as follows: France invades Germany, Germany fights back, Germany attacks out of anger, the French public demands a tougher stance…. And this cycle continues for several hundred years. World War I was as much about Napoleon I as it was about Austria and Serbia.

When World War I ended, the French public demanded that Germany be punished severely. What the French governments and people did not comprehend was that they would be responsible for the instability in Germany that produced Adolf Hitler’s rise to power. In effect, the French demands in the Treaty of Versailles placed an unreasonable stress upon the German economy and newly-formed democracy. French hubris once again resulted in German rage.

German expenditures during World War I were ultimately responsible for a weak economy, but the French and allied demands affected German national pride as much as the economy. Germany’s instability was like that throughout European nations — workers were demanding more influence in German, and would later do so in France.

French existentialism was shaped by the experiences and emotions of the French Resistance. Jean- Paul Sartre, Albert Camus, Simone de Beauvoir, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and others were already socialists. Sartre, however, was not as politically active as other students and teachers he knew. Sartre’s years as a student were not spent as an activist, by French standards. Camus was much more political and passionate than Sartre. In part, this might be due to their differing family backgrounds. The war temporarily made members of the French Resistance equal.

The war further aligned the famous French Existentialists with the Soviet Communist Party. While the Soviet Union was eventually seen as The Evil Empire in the United States, the French public never embraced the idea. The Russian army had held the German army in place; any enemy of Germany could not be all bad.

The word “existential” is now applied to postmodern philosophy and social theory. Most people now assume existentialism has been replaced by various social and critical theories, most of those with the name of Marx attached. Jean-Paul Sartre suggested Marxism was the logical successor to existentialism — an attempt to reclaim the individual from capitalistic hegemony.

Some scholars suggest existentialism is historical, a mass emotional depression lasting from the middle of the nineteenth century though the middle of the twentieth. Once Sartre declared existentialism a thing of the past, that was it. Critical theory, postmodernism, and all things Marx rose in stature, fending off the likes of Ayn Rand.

Cooper, David E. Existentialism: A Reconstruction. 2nd ed. Oxford, UK; Malden, Mass: Blackwell Publishers, 1999. [0631213228 (hc), 0631213236 (pbk)]

Critchley, Simon. Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction. Very Short Introductions, Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. [0192853597]

Earnshaw, Steven. Existentialism: A Guide for the Perplexed. London; New York: Continuum International Pub. Group, 2006. [0826485294, 9780826485298 (hc); 0826485308, 9780826485304 (pbk)]

Flynn, Thomas R. Existentialism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2006. [0192804286]

Complete Bibliography

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook

Click to share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky

Click to share on Threads (Opens in new window) Threads

Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X

Click to share on Mastodon (Opens in new window) Mastodon

Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn

Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit

Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr