Your privacy, your choice

We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media, as well as to allow video information to be shared for both marketing, analytics and editorial purposes.

By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.

See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data.

Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices.

Ethical and Legal Aspects of Computing

A Short History of Ethics

First Online: 24 March 2024

Part of the book series: Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science ((UTICS))

This chapter presents a history of ethics, and we discuss ethics in ancient civilisations as well as ethics in several religious traditions. We discuss utilitarian and deontological ethics and consider the question of what it means to be an ethical person in a complex world.

This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution to check access.

Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month

Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals

Available as EPUB and PDF

Compact, lightweight edition

Dispatched in 3 to 5 business days

Free shipping worldwide - see info

Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout

Purchases are for personal use only

Institutional subscriptions

Similar content being viewed by others

Utilitarianism: A Modern, Godless Ethics?

Evolution of Ethics in the World of Technology: Philosophical Origins

Explore related subjects

History of Philosophy

History of Philosophy as Method

Moral Philosophy and Applied Ethics

Philosophy of History

1.Mesopotamia was located in modern Iraq, Syria and Turkey between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and it is known as the “cradle of civilisation”. It consisted of several civilisations spanning a period of roughly 3000 years, which included the Sumerians, the Akkadians, the Babylonians, the Hittites and the Assyrians. Some of the famous Mesopotamian sites include Ur, Babylon, Nimrud, and Nineveh. Mesopotamia led to many important inventions that changed the world such as the wheel, maps, and writing. Mesopotamia came under the control of Cyrus the Great of Persia c. 539 B.C., and Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire c. 331 B.C.

Mesopotamia was located in modern Iraq, Syria and Turkey between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and it is known as the “cradle of civilisation”. It consisted of several civilisations spanning a period of roughly 3000 years, which included the Sumerians, the Akkadians, the Babylonians, the Hittites and the Assyrians. Some of the famous Mesopotamian sites include Ur, Babylon, Nimrud, and Nineveh. Mesopotamia led to many important inventions that changed the world such as the wheel, maps, and writing. Mesopotamia came under the control of Cyrus the Great of Persia c. 539 B.C., and Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire c. 331 B.C.

2.A part of this ritual involved weighing the deceased person’s heart against a feather, and if the heart weighed less than a feather (i.e., light hearted) then the deceased was judged to be a good person.

A part of this ritual involved weighing the deceased person’s heart against a feather, and if the heart weighed less than a feather (i.e., light hearted) then the deceased was judged to be a good person.

3.The ancient library in Alexandria was once the largest library in the world. It was build during the Hellenistic period in the third century B.C. and destroyed by fire in 391 A.D.

The ancient library in Alexandria was once the largest library in the world. It was build during the Hellenistic period in the third century B.C. and destroyed by fire in 391 A.D.

4.Women or slaves did not participate in the Athenian democracy!

Women or slaves did not participate in the Athenian democracy!

5.Socrates was a moral philosopher who deeply influenced Plato. His method of enquiry into philosophical problems and ethics was by questioning the citizens of Athens. Socrates himself maintained that he knew nothing (Socratic ignorance). However, from his questioning it became apparent that those who thought they were clever were not really that clever after all. His approach obviously would not have made him very popular with the citizens of Athens. Socrates was sentenced to death for allegedly corrupting the youth of Athens, and he was forced drink the juice of the hemlock plant (a type of poison).

Socrates was a moral philosopher who deeply influenced Plato. His method of enquiry into philosophical problems and ethics was by questioning the citizens of Athens. Socrates himself maintained that he knew nothing (Socratic ignorance). However, from his questioning it became apparent that those who thought they were clever were not really that clever after all. His approach obviously would not have made him very popular with the citizens of Athens. Socrates was sentenced to death for allegedly corrupting the youth of Athens, and he was forced drink the juice of the hemlock plant (a type of poison).

6.Socrates did not write any works on philosophy, and knowledge of his approach to moral philosophy is described in Plato’s early dialogues, whereas the “Socrates” of the later dialogues reflects Plato’s mature philosophical thinking rather than that of the historical Socrates.

Socrates did not write any works on philosophy, and knowledge of his approach to moral philosophy is described in Plato’s early dialogues, whereas the “Socrates” of the later dialogues reflects Plato’s mature philosophical thinking rather than that of the historical Socrates.

7.Chaerephon (a lifelong friend of Socrates) asked the oracle at Delphi who was the wisest of all men, and the oracle replied that there was none wiser than Socrates. Socrates set out to determine what the oracle meant by this statement, and in his discussions with the wise of Athens he realised that those considered wise really knew nothing but thought that they did, whereas he alone was aware that he knew nothing (Socratic Ignorance).

Chaerephon (a lifelong friend of Socrates) asked the oracle at Delphi who was the wisest of all men, and the oracle replied that there was none wiser than Socrates. Socrates set out to determine what the oracle meant by this statement, and in his discussions with the wise of Athens he realised that those considered wise really knew nothing but thought that they did, whereas he alone was aware that he knew nothing (Socratic Ignorance).

8.Constantine had lifted the ban on Christianity in the Roman Empire in 313 A.D, and the emperor Theodosius I declared Christianity to be the official religion of the Roman Empire in 380 A.D.

Constantine had lifted the ban on Christianity in the Roman Empire in 313 A.D, and the emperor Theodosius I declared Christianity to be the official religion of the Roman Empire in 380 A.D.

9.There were a number of schisms in the early Christian church, including Arianism which was a dispute on the nature of the Trinity, and whether the Father caused the creation of the Son and Holy Spirit.

There were a number of schisms in the early Christian church, including Arianism which was a dispute on the nature of the Trinity, and whether the Father caused the creation of the Son and Holy Spirit.

10.This principle is also part of Judaism and Islam.

This principle is also part of Judaism and Islam.

11.Bertrand Russell was an influentialBritish logician, mathematician and philosopher, and his grandfather was a former prime minister of Britain. He was the co-author with Alfred Whitehead of Principia Mathematica, which aimed to derive all of the truths of mathematics from logic. Russell was also active in political causes such as the campaign for nuclear disarmament. He was sympathetic to the plight of the Palestinian people, and he criticised Israeli actions in annexing the territory of the West Bank and Jerusalem after the 1967 war. He also opposed the Vietnam War.

Bertrand Russell was an influential

British logician, mathematician and philosopher, and his grandfather was a former prime minister of Britain. He was the co-author with Alfred Whitehead of Principia Mathematica, which aimed to derive all of the truths of mathematics from logic. Russell was also active in political causes such as the campaign for nuclear disarmament. He was sympathetic to the plight of the Palestinian people, and he criticised Israeli actions in annexing the territory of the West Bank and Jerusalem after the 1967 war. He also opposed the Vietnam War.

12.Some Islamic scholars question whether it is appropriate to attach the same importance to the Sunnah/Hadith as the Koran. This is since the former was written over a century after the death of the prophet and so errors could have been introduced given the elapsed time. Further, if the Sunnah/Hadith had been divinely revealed they would have been written down at the same time as the Koran was written down.

Some Islamic scholars question whether it is appropriate to attach the same importance to the Sunnah/Hadith as the Koran. This is since the former was written over a century after the death of the prophet and so errors could have been introduced given the elapsed time. Further, if the Sunnah/Hadith had been divinely revealed they would have been written down at the same time as the Koran was written down.

13.The prophet is buried in the city of Medina (one of the three holiest cities of Islam), and the city is also visited as part of the annual Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages to Mecca. One of the earliest battles in Islam was fought at Mt. Uhud on the outskirts of Medina.

The prophet is buried in the city of Medina (one of the three holiest cities of Islam), and the city is also visited as part of the annual Hajj and Umrah pilgrimages to Mecca. One of the earliest battles in Islam was fought at Mt. Uhud on the outskirts of Medina.

14.Jihad also includes striving by peaceful as well as by armed means to achieve the goals of a Muslim community. The Koran specifies the conditions for war and peace in the case of an armed conflict.

Jihad also includes striving by peaceful as well as by armed means to achieve the goals of a Muslim community. The Koran specifies the conditions for war and peace in the case of an armed conflict.

15.It has been suggested by some scholars that in pre-Islamic Arabia that the Ka’baa was originally dedicated to Hubai, a Nabatean deity. Petra in Jordan was the northern capital of the Nabatean civilisation with Madain Salih near Al Ula in Saudi Arabia the southern capital. In early Islam, the direction of prayer (qibia) for Muslims was in the direction of Jerusalem, but this was later changed to the direction of the Ka’baa in Mecca.

It has been suggested by some scholars that in pre-Islamic Arabia that the Ka’baa was originally dedicated to Hubai, a Nabatean deity. Petra in Jordan was the northern capital of the Nabatean civilisation with Madain Salih near Al Ula in Saudi Arabia the southern capital. In early Islam, the direction of prayer (qibia) for Muslims was in the direction of Jerusalem, but this was later changed to the direction of the Ka’baa in Mecca.

16.Some Muslim societies (e.g., in Saudi Arabia and other parts of the Arabian peninsula) are patriarchal, and require females to wear a loose long black robe termed an abaya, and some also require them to have their hair and face covered with a hijab and niqab. Other Muslim societies (e.g., Indonesia) are more relaxed in the dress code for females, and they may wear more colourful clothes. The Prophet emphasised that women should dress modestly, but he did not specify what this meant in terms of burka, abaya, hijab and niqab. Some of the practices that are unique to Islam in the Arabian peninsula seem to have their origin in the tribal practices of the Bedouin desert tribes in Arabia from which Islam emerged.

Some Muslim societies (e.g., in Saudi Arabia and other parts of the Arabian peninsula) are patriarchal, and require females to wear a loose long black robe termed an abaya, and some also require them to have their hair and face covered with a hijab and niqab. Other Muslim societies (e.g., Indonesia) are more relaxed in the dress code for females, and they may wear more colourful clothes. The Prophet emphasised that women should dress modestly, but he did not specify what this meant in terms of burka, abaya, hijab and niqab. Some of the practices that are unique to Islam in the Arabian peninsula seem to have their origin in the tribal practices of the Bedouin desert tribes in Arabia from which Islam emerged.

17.The normal view of self is that it is a part of you that remains constant throughout life and defines “you” as you (i.e., it is the essential core of you). Buddhists reject this view and the Buddhist position is analogous to that of an automobile that is made up of parts that were assembled in a factory; the parts interact with each other and the road; they may wear out and be replaced; and eventually the car reaches the end of its life. The car does not have a self as such: it does not have a part that remains constant throughout its life. You, according to Buddhism as a person are like the car and have no self.

The normal view of self is that it is a part of you that remains constant throughout life and defines “you” as you (i.e., it is the essential core of you). Buddhists reject this view and the Buddhist position is analogous to that of an automobile that is made up of parts that were assembled in a factory; the parts interact with each other and the road; they may wear out and be replaced; and eventually the car reaches the end of its life. The car does not have a self as such: it does not have a part that remains constant throughout its life. You, according to Buddhism as a person are like the car and have no self.

18.Immanuel Kant was a highly influential German philosopher who lived all his life in the German city of Koenigsberg in East Prussia. The German population were expelled from the city at the end of the Second World War (the city became part of Russia), and it is now called Kalingrad. Kant’s most influential work “A Critique of Pure Reason” was a Copernican revolution in philosophy, and he rejected Hume’s empiricism, and instead argued that some knowledge exists inherently in the mind independent of experience.

Immanuel Kant was a highly influential German philosopher who lived all his life in the German city of Koenigsberg in East Prussia. The German population were expelled from the city at the end of the Second World War (the city became part of Russia), and it is now called Kalingrad. Kant’s most influential work “A Critique of Pure Reason” was a Copernican revolution in philosophy, and he rejected Hume’s empiricism, and instead argued that some knowledge exists inherently in the mind independent of experience.

A. MacIntyre, A Short History of Ethics (Routledge, London, 1995) Google Scholar

A. MacIntyre, A Short History of Ethics (Routledge, London, 1995)

T.J. Mawson, Belief in God. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005) Google Scholar

T.J. Mawson, Belief in God. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005)

B. Russell, Why I am not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects, 2nd edn. (Routledge, London, 2020) (Lecture delivered in 1927) Google Scholar

B. Russell, Why I am not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects, 2nd edn. (Routledge, London, 2020) (Lecture delivered in 1927)

.J.R. Hinnells, A Handbook of Living Religions (Penguin, 1991) Google Scholar

.J.R. Hinnells, A Handbook of Living Religions (Penguin, 1991)

S. Rinpoche, The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying (Random House Ltd., London, 1998) Google Scholar

S. Rinpoche, The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying (Random House Ltd., London, 1998)

I. Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Google Scholar

I. Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785)

Authors and Affiliations

Cork, IrelandGerard O’Regan

Gerard O’ReganView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMed Google Scholar

Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar

Rights and permissions

Reprints and permissions

Copyright information

© 2024 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG

O’Regan, G. (2024). A Short History of Ethics. In: Ethical and Legal Aspects of Computing. Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-52664-0_2

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-52664-0_2

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-52664-0_2

Published: 24 March 2024

Published: 24 March 2024

Publisher Name: Springer, Cham

Publisher Name: Springer, Cham

Print ISBN: 978-3-031-52663-3

Print ISBN: 978-3-031-52663-3

Online ISBN: 978-3-031-52664-0

Online ISBN: 978-3-031-52664-0

eBook Packages: Computer ScienceComputer Science (R0)

eBook Packages: Computer ScienceComputer Science (R0)

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month

Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals

Available as EPUB and PDF

Compact, lightweight edition

Dispatched in 3 to 5 business days

Free shipping worldwide - see info

Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout

Purchases are for personal use only

Institutional subscriptions

Publish your research

Open access publishing

Products and services

Partners and advertisers

Your privacy choices/Manage cookies

Your US state privacy rights

Accessibility statement

Cancel contracts here

© 2025 Springer Nature