school Campus Bookshelves

menu_book Bookshelves

perm_media Learning Objects

how_to_reg Request Instructor Account

hub Instructor Commons

Downloads expand_more Download Page (PDF) Download Full Book (PDF)

Download Full Book (PDF)

Resources expand_more Periodic Table Physics Constants Scientific Calculator

Scientific Calculator

Reference expand_more Reference & Cite

Help expand_more Get Help Feedback Readability

selected template will load here

This action is not available.

Search site Search Search Go back to previous article

Sign in Username Password Sign in Sign in Sign in Forgot password

Username Password Sign in

Sign in Sign in Forgot password

Early World Civilizations (Lumen)

6: Early Civilizations in the Indian Subcontinent

6.11: The Indus River Valley Civilization

6.11: The Indus River Valley Civilization

Last updated Apr 24, 2025

6.10: Ashoka’s Conversion 6.12: Decline of the Maurya Empire

6.10: Ashoka’s Conversion

6.12: Decline of the Maurya Empire

( \newcommand{\kernel}{\mathrm{null}\,}\)

Indus Valley Civilization

Harappa and Mohenjo-daro

Identify the importance of the discovery of the Indus River Valley Civilization

The Indus Valley Civilization (also known as the Harappan Civilization) was a Bronze Age society extending from modern northeast Afghanistan to Pakistan and northwest India.

The civilization developed in three phases: Early Harappan Phase (3300 BCE-2600 BCE), Mature Harappan Phase (2600 BCE-1900 BCE), and Late Harappan Phase (1900 BCE-1300 BCE).

Inhabitants of the ancient Indus River valley developed new techniques in handicraft, including Carnelian products and seal carving, and metallurgy with copper, bronze, lead, and tin.

Sir John Hubert Marshall led an excavation campaign in 1921-1922, during which he discovered the ruins of the city of Harappa. By 1931, the Mohenjo-daro site had been mostly excavated by Marshall and Sir Mortimer Wheeler. By 1999, over 1,056 cities and settlements of the Indus Civilization were located.

An emblem used as a means of authentication. Seal can refer to an impression in paper, wax, clay, or other medium. It can also refer to the device used.

The scientific and mechanical technique of working with bronze. copper, and tin.

The Indus Valley Civilization existed through its early years of 3300-1300 BCE, and its mature period of 2600-1900 BCE. The area of this civilization extended along the Indus River from what today is northeast Afghanistan, into Pakistan and northwest India. The Indus Civilization was the most widespread of the three early civilizations of the ancient world, along with Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. Harappa and Mohenjo-daro were thought to be the two great cities of the Indus Valley Civilization, emerging around 2600 BCE along the Indus River Valley in the Sindh and Punjab provinces of Pakistan. Their discovery and excavation in the 19th and 20th centuries provided important archaeological data about ancient cultures.

Indus Valley Civilization

The Indus Valley Civilization was one of the three “Ancient East” societies that are considered to be the cradles of civilization of the old world of man, and are among the most widespread; the other two “Ancient East” societies are Mesopotamia and Pharonic Egypt. The lifespan of the Indus Valley Civilization is often separated into three phases: Early Harappan Phase (3300-2600 BCE), Mature Harappan Phase (2600-1900 BCE) and Late Harappan Phase (1900-1300 BCE).

At its peak, the Indus Valley Civilization may had a population of over five million people. It is considered a Bronze Age society, and inhabitants of the ancient Indus River Valley developed new techniques in metallurgy—the science of working with copper, bronze, lead, and tin. They also performed intricate handicraft, especially using products made of the semi-precious gemstone Carnelian, as well as seal carving— the cutting of patterns into the bottom face of a seal used for stamping. The Indus cities are noted for their urban planning, baked brick houses, elaborate drainage systems, water supply systems, and clusters of large, non-residential buildings.

The Indus Valley Civilization is also known as the Harappan Civilization, after Harappa, the first of its sites to be excavated in the 1920s, in what was then the Punjab province of British India and is now in Pakistan. The discoveries of Harappa, and the site of its fellow Indus city Mohenjo-daro, were the culmination of work beginning in 1861 with the founding of the Archaeological Survey of India in the British Raj, the common name for British imperial rule over the Indian subcontinent from 1858 through 1947.

Harappa and Mohenjo-daro

Harappa was a fortified city in modern-day Pakistan that is believed to have been home to as many as 23,500 residents living in sculpted houses with flat roofs made of red sand and clay. The city spread over 150 hectares (370 acres) and had fortified administrative and religious centers of the same type used in Mohenjo-daro. The modern village of Harappa, used as a railway station during the Raj, is six kilometers (3.7 miles) from the ancient city site, which suffered heavy damage during the British period of rule.

Mohenjo-daro is thought to have been built in the 26th century BCE and became not only the largest city of the Indus Valley Civilization but one of the world’s earliest, major urban centers. Located west of the Indus River in the Larkana District, Mohenjo-daro was one of the most sophisticated cities of the period, with sophisticated engineering and urban planning. Cock-fighting was thought to have religious and ritual significance, with domesticated chickens bred for religion rather than food (although the city may have been a point of origin for the worldwide domestication of chickens). Mohenjo-daro was abandoned around 1900 BCE when the Indus Civilization went into sudden decline.

The ruins of Harappa were first described in 1842 by Charles Masson in his book, Narrative of Various Journeys in Balochistan, Afghanistan, the Panjab, & Kalât. In 1856, British engineers John and William Brunton were laying the East Indian Railway Company line connecting the cities of Karachi and Lahore, when their crew discovered hard, well-burnt bricks in the area and used them for ballast for the railroad track, unwittingly dismantling the ruins of the ancient city of Brahminabad.

In 1912, John Faithfull Fleet, an English civil servant working with the Indian Civil Services, discovered several Harappan seals. This prompted an excavation campaign from 1921-1922 by Sir John Hubert Marshall, Director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India, which resulted in the discovery of Harappa. By 1931, much of Mohenjo-Daro had been excavated, while the next director of the Archaeological Survey of India, Sir Mortimer Wheeler, led additional excavations.

The Partition of India, in 1947, divided the country to create the new nation of Pakistan. The bulk of the archaeological finds that followed were inherited by Pakistan. By 1999, over 1,056 cities and settlements had been found, of which 96 have been excavated.

Boundless World History. Authored by: Boundless. Located at: https://www.boundless.com/world-history/textbooks/boundless-world-history-textbook/. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

This page titled 6.11: The Indus River Valley Civilization is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lumen Learning via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.10: Ashoka’s Conversion 6.12: Decline of the Maurya Empire

6.10: Ashoka’s Conversion

6.12: Decline of the Maurya Empire

Was this article helpful?

6.1: The Sramana MovementThis page discusses the Sramana movement, an ancient Indian religious tradition that arose between 800-600 BCE, rejecting Vedic ritualism and Brahmin ...

6.2: BuddhismThis page discusses Buddhism, a major religion with around 488 million followers that originated in the 5th century BCE from the Sramana movement. It ...

6.3: JainismThis page provides an overview of Jainism, an ancient Indian religion rooted in the Sramana movement, which emphasizes non-violence, spiritual indepen...

6.4: The Achaemenid EmpireThis page discusses the Achaemenid Empire, established around 550 BCE by Cyrus the Great after conquering the Median Empire. It became the first globa...

Article type Section or Page Author Lumen Learning License CC BY-SA License Version 4.0 Show TOC no

Tags ancient history archaeology Bronze Age excavation Harappa harappan civilization Indus Valley Civilization metallurgy Mohenjo-daro source@https://courses.lumenlearning.com/atd-herkimer-worldcivilization/ urban planning

harappan civilization

Indus Valley Civilization

source@https://courses.lumenlearning.com/atd-herkimer-worldcivilization/

© Copyright 2025 Humanities LibreTexts

Powered by CXone Expert ®

The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and are supported by the Department of Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the UC Davis Office of the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions Program, and Merlot. We also acknowledge previous National Science Foundation support under grant numbers 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739. Privacy Policy. Terms & Conditions. Accessibility Statement. For more information contact us at info@libretexts.org.