For homes For homes Save on your energy bills Easy ways to save on your energy bills Understand your energy bills Make sure you're on the right power plan Need help paying your energy bill? Improve your home Insulate your home Window insulation Reduce draughts Reduce dampness Design for energy efficiency Do a healthy home check Energy saving technology Plan your home energy upgrades Induction cooktops Water heating Heating and cooling Choose good appliances Solar Is solar right for your home? Learn about home solar tech Essentials of solar quotes and installation Optimising your home solar system Vehicles Fuel efficient driving Benefits of electric vehicles Compare different EV options EV battery life, care and driving range tips Charging your EV Smart EV chargers Funding Warmer Kiwi Homes

Save on your energy bills Easy ways to save on your energy bills Understand your energy bills Make sure you're on the right power plan Need help paying your energy bill?

Easy ways to save on your energy bills

Understand your energy bills

Make sure you're on the right power plan

Need help paying your energy bill?

Improve your home Insulate your home Window insulation Reduce draughts Reduce dampness Design for energy efficiency Do a healthy home check

Design for energy efficiency

Do a healthy home check

Energy saving technology Plan your home energy upgrades Induction cooktops Water heating Heating and cooling Choose good appliances

Plan your home energy upgrades

Choose good appliances

Solar Is solar right for your home? Learn about home solar tech Essentials of solar quotes and installation Optimising your home solar system

Is solar right for your home?

Learn about home solar tech

Essentials of solar quotes and installation

Optimising your home solar system

Vehicles Fuel efficient driving Benefits of electric vehicles Compare different EV options EV battery life, care and driving range tips Charging your EV Smart EV chargers

Fuel efficient driving

Benefits of electric vehicles

Compare different EV options

EV battery life, care and driving range tips

Funding Warmer Kiwi Homes

For businesses For businesses Reduce energy costs Starting your business energy management journey Understand how your business uses energy Take action to improve energy efficiency Energy-smart work habits Upgrade your technology Find support and funding Energy saving technology Heating and cooling Water heating Refrigeration Lighting Building management systems Efficient on-site equipment Solar Vehicles Use fuel efficiently Benefits of electric work vehicles Workplace EV charging Plan for emissions reduction Measure your emissions Create an action plan Report on your progress

Reduce energy costs Starting your business energy management journey Understand how your business uses energy Take action to improve energy efficiency Energy-smart work habits Upgrade your technology Find support and funding

Starting your business energy management journey

Understand how your business uses energy

Take action to improve energy efficiency

Energy-smart work habits

Upgrade your technology

Find support and funding

Energy saving technology Heating and cooling Water heating Refrigeration Lighting Building management systems Efficient on-site equipment

Building management systems

Efficient on-site equipment

Vehicles Use fuel efficiently Benefits of electric work vehicles Workplace EV charging

Benefits of electric work vehicles

Workplace EV charging

Plan for emissions reduction Measure your emissions Create an action plan Report on your progress

Measure your emissions

Create an action plan

Report on your progress

Co-funding and support Co-funding and support For businesses For large energy users For the public sector For individuals and communities Previously funded projects

Co-funding and support

For large energy users

For the public sector

For individuals and communities

Previously funded projects

Regulations Regulations Equipment Energy Efficiency About the E3 programme How to comply About energy rating labels Ensuring compliance Vehicle Emissions and Energy Economy About the VEEEL Programme How to comply Ensuring compliance Regulatory requirements under review Emissions Plan Guidance Voluntary Guidance EV Smart Charger Approved List Best practice guidance documents

Equipment Energy Efficiency About the E3 programme How to comply About energy rating labels Ensuring compliance

About the E3 programme

About energy rating labels

Vehicle Emissions and Energy Economy About the VEEEL Programme How to comply Ensuring compliance

About the VEEEL Programme

Regulatory requirements under review

Emissions Plan Guidance

Voluntary Guidance EV Smart Charger Approved List Best practice guidance documents

EV Smart Charger Approved List

Best practice guidance documents

Insights Insights EECA Insights Case studies and articles Data tools New Zealand Energy Scenarios tool Energy End Use Database Regional Heat Demand Database Regional Energy Transition Accelerator Dashboard Public EV Charger Dashboard Community EV Charger Planner Data sources Energy in New Zealand The future of energy in New Zealand New Zealand's energy-related emissions Renewable energy Demand flexibility — a smarter grid

Case studies and articles

Data tools New Zealand Energy Scenarios tool Energy End Use Database Regional Heat Demand Database Regional Energy Transition Accelerator Dashboard Public EV Charger Dashboard Community EV Charger Planner Data sources

New Zealand Energy Scenarios tool

Energy End Use Database

Regional Heat Demand Database

Regional Energy Transition Accelerator Dashboard

Public EV Charger Dashboard

Community EV Charger Planner

Energy in New Zealand The future of energy in New Zealand New Zealand's energy-related emissions Renewable energy Demand flexibility — a smarter grid

The future of energy in New Zealand

New Zealand's energy-related emissions

Demand flexibility — a smarter grid

Focus areas Energy efficiency first Empower energy users Accelerate renewable energy

Energy efficiency first

Accelerate renewable energy

Careers Why join EECA Vacancies

News & corporate Corporate documents News Tenders & RFPs Consultations Official information

Official Information Act request

Social media community guidelines

Training and events EECA market update A deep dive into how businesses approach energy use and climate change The role of heat pumps in decarbonisation CEP courses and webinars

A deep dive into how businesses approach energy use and climate change

The role of heat pumps in decarbonisation

CEP courses and webinars

For large energy users

For the public sector

For individuals and communities

Previously funded projects

Regulatory requirements under review

Emissions Plan Guidance

Case studies and articles

Geothermal energy in New Zealand

Learn about geothermal energy in New Zealand, and its advantages and limitations.

Energy in New Zealand

Geothermal energy is an important renewable energy source for New Zealand, providing around 18% of our electricity. In addition, geothermal energy is also directly used for industrial process heat, space heating and water heating.

Geothermal generation is expected to grow in the coming decade, and will continue to be one of the country’s largest sources of renewable energy.

How much of our electricity comes from geothermal?

2021 data is sourced from MBIE. Future indications come from the Climate Change Commission and New Zealand Energy Scenarios TIMES-NZ 2.0 modelling.

How does geothermal energy work?

Geothermal energy taps the earth’s natural heat flow from the hot mantle (at around 1000oC) up into the cooler crust. New Zealand has an abundant supply of geothermal energy because we are located on the boundary between two tectonic plates.

The crust is thin along this rift and supports at least 23 distinct geothermal plumes or fields. Of these fields, eight currently generate electricity or supply direct users. These are: Wairakei, Tauhara, Rotokawa, Mokai, Nga Tamariki, Ohaaki, Kawerau, and Ngāwhā.

To produce electricity, hot geothermal fluid flows from production wells through a system of pipes and vessels to drive turbines that, in turn, produce electricity.

Steam condensate and unused geothermal fluid are usually injected back into the geothermal system to maintain pressure and contain potential contaminants.

In addition, hot water and steam from geothermal sources is used directly for industrial processes including pulp and paper-making, wood processing, dairy manufacturing and heating greenhouses, reducing reliance on fossil fuels. In some cases, the hot water and/or steam is a by-product of electricity generation, making it especially cost-effective.

The future of geothermal energy in New Zealand

Geothermal electricity is unusual among renewable electricity generation types, because the energy from the steam is available constantly and consistently across time. Because of this reliability, geothermal energy will continue to play a key role in NZ’s energy future.

Total geothermal electricity capacity in New Zealand stands at over 900 MW, making us the fifth largest generator of geothermal in the world. It has been estimated that there is sufficient geothermal resource for another 1,000 MW of electricity generation.

Geothermal energy is also going to become cleaner. Currently, some carbon dioxide dissolved in geothermal fluid is emitted as part of the generation process. The industry is currently developing technology to re-inject (sequester) most of these gas discharges. For instance, the Te Huka power station currently re-injects 90% of its previous greenhouse gas emissions. With further development, geothermal CO2 emissions should decline to negligible levels.

There are also opportunities to use more direct geothermal energy, such as for industrial process heat, or by finding uses for waste heat from geothermal power stations.

Advantages and limitations of geothermal energy

Reliable – Geothermal energy supply isn't dependent on weather conditions, making it consistent and reliable. This makes it an ideal energy source to supply baseload generation to work alongside intermittent renewable energy sources such as wind and solar which supply flexible, dynamic generation to the grid.

Reliable – Geothermal energy supply isn't dependent on weather conditions, making it consistent and reliable. This makes it an ideal energy source to supply baseload generation to work alongside intermittent renewable energy sources such as wind and solar which supply flexible, dynamic generation to the grid.

Low emissions – While electricity generated from geothermal energy produces some greenhouse gas emissions, the average emissions intensity of geothermal electricity is about one-quarter of that of the cleanest natural gas-fuelled power station. There are some technologies emerging that capture minerals and greenhouse gases and enable their re-use or sequestration.

Low emissions – While electricity generated from geothermal energy produces some greenhouse gas emissions, the average emissions intensity of geothermal electricity is about one-quarter of that of the cleanest natural gas-fuelled power station. There are some technologies emerging that capture minerals and greenhouse gases and enable their re-use or sequestration.

Somewhat abundant – New Zealand has better access to geothermal energy than many other countries as we are positioned between two tectonic plates. It has been estimated that we have capacity to roughly double the current electricity generation from geothermal energy - although further increases might be difficult to achieve.

Somewhat abundant – New Zealand has better access to geothermal energy than many other countries as we are positioned between two tectonic plates. It has been estimated that we have capacity to roughly double the current electricity generation from geothermal energy - although further increases might be difficult to achieve.

Location – New Zealand’s high temperature fields lie either side of our major demand centre of Auckland; at Ngawha in Northland; and through the Taupō Volcanic Zone between Ruapehu and Whakatane and near the supporting high-voltage transmission system. Because of this, adding extra geothermal electricity capacity to the grid may require less extensive system upgrades than connecting other, more remote, generation facilities.

Development cost and time – Developing a geothermal power station is an expensive and risky proposition, including drilling of the wells which is expensive and time-consuming. Finding a location is difficult as specialised geo-survey techniques are required to identify locations for geothermal power stations. In addition, many kilometres of expensive steel piping is needed to connect multiple wells spread over a large area to the turbine building. This means that it can take several years to go from concept to completion.

Specialised maintenance – While geothermal is a renewable resource, it needs careful management and monitoring to control reservoir water and pressure levels and prevent land subsidence and depletion.

Specialised maintenance – While geothermal is a renewable resource, it needs careful management and monitoring to control reservoir water and pressure levels and prevent land subsidence and depletion.

Emissions – Geothermal fluids contain some greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and methane) which are transported to the surface when the fluid is extracted. While amounts vary from field to field and the amount that is released depends on the design of the power station, generally levels are still significantly less than natural gas-fuelled or coal fired power stations.

Emissions – Geothermal fluids contain some greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and methane) which are transported to the surface when the fluid is extracted. While amounts vary from field to field and the amount that is released depends on the design of the power station, generally levels are still significantly less than natural gas-fuelled or coal fired power stations.

EECA and geothermal energy

EECA supported Essity’s ground-breaking geothermal project – a world first. At their site in Kawerau, Essity produces over 50,000 tonnes of toilet tissue and paper towel products every year. By switching from using natural gas to geothermal energy, Essity will reduce their carbon emissions by 23% and secure the future of the Kawerau site while supporting the local economy. The project is co-funded by EECA through the Government Investment in Decarbonising Industry initiative (GIDI Fund).

Essity's groundbreaking geothermal project a world first

Geothermal heat pumps (GHPs), also known as ground-source heat pumps (GSHPs), have been co-funded by EECA to replace all fossil fuel boilers at Christchurch Airport through EECA’s Technology Demonstration Fund.

Christchurch Airport | Decarbonisation journey

EECA has also co-funded a number of other GSHP projects as part of the Christchurch rebuild programme including The Arts Centre, Christchurch Town Hall, Christchurch Bus Exchange, King Edward Barracks (Ngāi Tahu) and more.

A sustainable rebuilt city using geothermal heatpumps: The Christchurch Story(external link)

Learn more about geothermal energy Find more information on the New Zealand Geothermal Association website. Geothermal in New Zealand

Learn more about geothermal energy

Find more information on the New Zealand Geothermal Association website.

Geothermal in New Zealand

Continue reading Renewable energy Learn about the renewable energy sources and carriers that New Zealand is reliant on, and that will play a role in our low-emissions future. Read more Wind energy High average wind speeds make wind an abundant energy source in New Zealand, and its use is projected to increase significantly. Solar energy Solar panels can be installed almost anywhere energy is needed, and the technology is becoming increasingly commercially viable. Hydroelectricity A reliable and controllable energy source, hydro generation provides the backbone of New Zealand’s electricity system. Geothermal New Zealand has an abundant supply of geothermal energy because we are located on the boundary between two tectonic plates. Biomass energy Use of biomass as a direct use energy source is expected to increase in New Zealand as it is a low emission and affordable renewable fuel source. Green hydrogen Green hydrogen is a clean energy carrier that could play a role in the future low-emissions energy mix.

Learn about the renewable energy sources and carriers that New Zealand is reliant on, and that will play a role in our low-emissions future.

Wind energy High average wind speeds make wind an abundant energy source in New Zealand, and its use is projected to increase significantly.

High average wind speeds make wind an abundant energy source in New Zealand, and its use is projected to increase significantly.

Solar energy Solar panels can be installed almost anywhere energy is needed, and the technology is becoming increasingly commercially viable.

Solar panels can be installed almost anywhere energy is needed, and the technology is becoming increasingly commercially viable.

Hydroelectricity A reliable and controllable energy source, hydro generation provides the backbone of New Zealand’s electricity system.

A reliable and controllable energy source, hydro generation provides the backbone of New Zealand’s electricity system.

Geothermal New Zealand has an abundant supply of geothermal energy because we are located on the boundary between two tectonic plates.

New Zealand has an abundant supply of geothermal energy because we are located on the boundary between two tectonic plates.

Biomass energy Use of biomass as a direct use energy source is expected to increase in New Zealand as it is a low emission and affordable renewable fuel source.

Use of biomass as a direct use energy source is expected to increase in New Zealand as it is a low emission and affordable renewable fuel source.

Green hydrogen Green hydrogen is a clean energy carrier that could play a role in the future low-emissions energy mix.

Green hydrogen is a clean energy carrier that could play a role in the future low-emissions energy mix.

Te Kāwanatanga o Aotearoa /