All the major chapters in the American story, from Indigenous beginnings to the present day.

Colonial AmericaColonial America

American RevolutionAmerican Revolution

ImmigrationImmigration

Great DepressionGreat Depression

Black HistoryBlack History

Hispanic HistoryHispanic History

Women’s HistoryWomen’s History

LGBTQ+ HistoryLGBTQ+ History

Native American HistoryNative American History

Asian American, Native Hawaiian & Pacific Islander HistoryAsian American, Native Hawaiian & Pacific Islander History

U.S. PresidentsU.S. Presidents

First LadiesFirst Ladies

U.S. ConstitutionU.S. Constitution

U.S. Government and PoliticsU.S. Government and Politics

U.S. StatesU.S. States

History from countries and communities across the globe, including the world’s major wars.

African HistoryAfrican History

Asian HistoryAsian History

European HistoryEuropean History

ExplorationExploration

Industrial RevolutionIndustrial Revolution

Latin American & Caribbean HistoryLatin American & Caribbean History

Middle Eastern HistoryMiddle Eastern History

World War IWorld War I

World War IIWorld War II

Vietnam WarVietnam War

From prehistory, though antiquity and into the 21st century, all of history’s biggest chapters.

Ancient GreeceAncient Greece

Ancient EgyptAncient Egypt

Ancient ChinaAncient China

Ancient Middle EastAncient Middle East

Ancient AmericasAncient Americas

Ancient RomeAncient Rome

Middle AgesMiddle Ages

RenaissanceRenaissance

19th Century19th Century

20th Century20th Century

21st Century21st Century

The stories behind the faiths, food, entertainment and holidays that shape our world.

Arts & EntertainmentArts & Entertainment

Mysteries & FolkloreMysteries & Folklore

The pivotal discoveries, visionary inventors and natural phenomena that impacted history.

Inventions & ScienceInventions & Science

Natural Disasters & EnvironmentNatural Disasters & Environment

Space ExplorationSpace Exploration

ArchaeologyArchaeology

By: HISTORY.com Editors

Where Did the Maya Live?

Early Maya, 1800 B.C. to A.D. 250

Mayan Pyramids of the Classic Maya, A.D. 250-900

The Mayan Calendar and Culture

Maya Life in the Rainforest

What Happened to the Maya?

Do the Maya Still Exist?

The Mayan Empire, centered in the tropical lowlands of what is now Guatemala, reached the peak of its power and influence around the sixth century A.D. The Maya excelled at agriculture, pottery, writing, calendars and mathematics, and left behind an astonishing amount of impressive architecture and symbolic artwork. Most of the great stone cities of the Maya were abandoned by A.D. 900, however, and since the 19th century scholars have debated what might have caused this dramatic decline.

Where Did the Maya Live?

The Maya civilization was one of the most dominant Indigenous societies of Mesoamerica (a term used to describe Mexico and Central America before the 16th-century Spanish conquest).

Ancient Mayan structures have lasted thousands of years, and their designs continue to influence modern architecture.

Unlike other scattered Indigenous populations of Mesoamerica, the Maya were centered in one geographical block covering all of the Yucatan Peninsula and modern-day Guatemala; Belize and parts of the Mexican states of Tabasco and Chiapas; and the western part of Honduras and El Salvador. This concentration showed that the Maya remained relatively secure from invasion by other Mesoamerican peoples.

Among the earliest Maya a single language existed, but by the Preclassic Period a great linguistic diversity developed among the various Maya peoples. In modern-day Mexico and Central America, around 5 million people speak some 70 Maya languages; most of them are bilingual in Spanish.

Within that expanse, the Maya lived in three separate sub-areas with distinct environmental and cultural differences: the northern Maya lowlands on the Yucatan Peninsula; the southern lowlands in the Peten district of northern Guatemala and adjacent portions of Mexico, Belize and western Honduras; and the southern Maya highlands, in the mountainous region of southern Guatemala.

Most famously, the Maya of the southern lowland region reached their peak during the Classic Period of Maya civilization (A.D. 250 to 900), and built the great stone cities and monuments that have fascinated explorers and scholars of the region to this day.

Behind every great empire there is a central metropolis—hubs of technology, politics, engineering and massive populations comparable to cities of today.

Commercial-free, Cancel anytime

Exclusions & terms apply

Early Maya, 1800 B.C. to A.D. 250

The earliest Maya settlements date to around 1800 B.C., or the beginning of what is called the Preclassic or Formative Period. The earliest Maya were agricultural, growing crops such as corn (maize), beans, squash and cassava (manioc). During the Middle Preclassic Period, which lasted until about 300 B.C., Maya farmers began to expand their presence both in the highland and lowland regions.

The Middle Preclassic Period also saw the rise of the first major Mesoamerican civilization, the Olmecs. Like other Mesamerican peoples, such as the Zapotec, Totonac, Teotihuacán and Aztec, the Maya derived a number of religious and cultural traits—as well as their number system and their famous calendar—from the Olmec.

In addition to agriculture, the Preclassic Maya also displayed more advanced cultural traits like pyramid-building, city construction and the inscribing of stone monuments.

The Late Preclassic city of Mirador, in the northern Peten, was one of the greatest cities ever built in the pre-Columbian Americas. Its size dwarfed the Classic Maya capital of Tikal, and its existence proves that the Maya flourished centuries before the Classic Period.

Explore the origins of the Temple of Chichen Itza, a Mayan pyramid in modern-day Mexico that features several unique features, including an echo designed to sound like a bird call.

Mayan Pyramids of the Classic Maya, A.D. 250-900

The Classic Period, which began around A.D. 250, was the golden age of the Maya Empire. Classic Maya civilization grew to some 40 cities, including Tikal, Uaxactún, Copán, Bonampak, Dos Pilas, Calakmul, Palenque and Río Bec; each city held a population of between 5,000 and 50,000 people. At its peak, the Maya population may have reached 2,000,000 or as many as 10,000,000.

Excavations of Maya sites have unearthed plazas, palaces, temples and pyramids, as well as courts for playing the famous Maya ball game ulama, all ritually and politically significant to Maya culture. Maya cities were surrounded and supported by a large population of farmers. Though the Maya practiced a primitive type of “slash-and-burn” agriculture, they also displayed evidence of more advanced farming methods, such as irrigation and terracing.

The Maya were deeply religious, and worshiped various gods related to nature, including the gods of the sun, the moon, rain and corn. At the top of Maya society were the kings, or “kuhul ajaw” (holy lords), who claimed to be related to gods and followed a hereditary succession. They were thought to serve as mediators between the gods and people on earth, and performed the elaborate religious ceremonies and rituals so important to the Maya culture.

The Mayan Calendar and Culture

The Classic Maya built many of their temples and palaces in a stepped pyramid shape, decorating them with elaborate reliefs and inscriptions. These structures have earned the Maya their reputation as the great artists of Mesoamerica.

Guided by their religious ritual, the Maya also made significant advances in mathematics and astronomy, including the use of the zero and the development of complex calendar systems like the Calendar Round, based on 365 days, and later, the Long Count Calendar, designed to last over 5,000 years.

Mayan Scientific Achievements

The growth of the great Mayan civilization is as much a mystery as its disappearance.

Serious exploration of Classic Maya sites began in the 1830s. By the early to mid-20th century, a small portion of their system of hieroglyph writing had been deciphered, and more about their history and culture became known. Most of what historians know about the Maya comes from what remains of their architecture and art, including stone carvings and inscriptions on their buildings and monuments.

The Maya also made paper from tree bark and wrote in books made from this paper, known as codices; four of these codices are known to have survived. They are also credited with some of the earliest uses of chocolate and of rubber.

Maya Life in the Rainforest

One of the many intriguing things about the Maya was their ability to build a great civilization in a tropical rainforest climate. Traditionally, ancient peoples had flourished in drier climates, where the centralized management of water resources (through irrigation and other techniques) formed the basis of society. (This was the case for the Teotihuacan of highland Mexico, contemporaries of the Classic Maya.) In the southern Maya lowlands, however, there were few navigable rivers for trade and transport, as well as no obvious need for an irrigation system.

By the late 20th century, researchers had concluded that the climate of the lowlands was in fact quite environmentally diverse. Though foreign invaders were disappointed by the region’s relative lack of silver and gold, the Maya took advantage of the area’s many natural resources, including limestone (for construction), the volcanic rock obsidian (for tools and weapons) and salt.

The environment also held other treasures for the Maya, including jade, quetzal feathers (used to decorate the elaborate costumes of Maya nobility) and marine shells, which were used as trumpets in ceremonies and warfare.

What Happened to the Maya?

From the late eighth through the end of the ninth century, something unknown happened to shake the Maya civilization to its foundations. One by one, the Classic cities in the southern lowlands were abandoned, and by A.D. 900, Mayan civilization in that region had collapsed. The reason for this mysterious decline is unknown, though scholars have developed several competing theories.

Some believe that by the ninth century, the Maya had exhausted the environment around them to the point that it could no longer sustain a very large population. Other Maya scholars argue that constant warfare among competing city-states led the complicated military, family (by marriage) and trade alliances between them to break down, along with the traditional system of dynastic power.

As the stature of the holy lords diminished, their complex traditions of rituals and ceremonies dissolved into chaos. Finally, some catastrophic environmental change — like an extremely long, intense period of drought — may have wiped out the Classic Maya civilization. Drought would have hit cities like Tikal especially hard, because rainwater there was necessary for drinking as well as for crop irrigation.

All three of these factors — overpopulation and overuse of the land, endemic warfare and drought — may have played a part in the downfall of the Maya in the southern lowlands. In the highlands of the Yucatan, a few Maya cities, such as Chichen Itza, Uxmal and Mayapán, continued to flourish in the Post-Classic Period (A.D. 900-1500). By the time the Spanish invaders arrived, however, most Maya were living in agricultural villages, their great cities hidden under a layer of verdant rainforest.

Do the Maya Still Exist?

Descendants of the Maya still live in Central America in modern-day Belize, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador and parts of Mexico.

The majority of modern-day Maya live in Guatemala, which is home to Tikal National Park, the site of the ruins of the ancient city of Tikal. Roughly 40 percent of Guatemalans are of Mayan descent.

Turkeys Were Once Worshipped Like Gods

The star of the Thanksgiving table was revered by the Maya.

6 Early Human Civilizations

Architecture, agriculture, art and more first blossomed in these cultures.

8 Ancient Wonders Across the Americas

These ancient landmarks offer insight into the civilizations of North and South America.

What Are the Crystal Skulls?

Beginning in the late 19th century, around a dozen carved skulls made of clear or milky white quartz—also known as rock crystal—made their way into private and public collections around the globe.

HISTORY.com works with a wide range of writers and editors to create accurate and informative content. All articles are regularly reviewed and updated by the HISTORY.com team. Articles with the “HISTORY.com Editors” byline have been written or edited by the HISTORY.com editors, including Amanda Onion, Missy Sullivan, Matt Mullen, Christian Zapata, Cristiana Lombardo and Adrienne Donica.

We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something that doesn't look right, click here to contact us! HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.

Sign up for Inside History

Get fascinating history stories twice a week that connect the past with today’s world, plus an in-depth exploration every Friday.

Legal Terms and Privacy

By clicking "Accept & Close", you have read and agree to our Terms of Use and agree to the collection and use of your information by cookies and similar technologies, as set forth in our Privacy Policy.