14 Facts About Quantum cryptography

Quantum cryptography is the science of exploiting quantum mechanical properties to perform cryptographic tasks.

The best known example of quantum cryptography is quantum key distribution which offers an information-theoretically secure solution to the key exchange problem.

Fun Fact Quantum cryptography

Toshiba Interesting Fact

Companies that manufacture quantum cryptography systems include MagiQ Technologies, Inc, ID Quantique, QuintessenceLabs, Toshiba, QNu Labs and SeQureNet.

Quantum cryptography has the potential to encrypt data for longer periods than classical cryptography.

Also, quantum cryptography has useful applications for governments and militaries as, historically, governments have kept military data secret for periods of over 60 years.

Quantum cryptography repeaters have the ability to resolve quantum communication errors in an efficient way.

Quantum cryptography repeaters do this by purifying the segments of the channel before connecting them creating a secure line of communication.

Quantum cryptography is a general subject that covers a broad range of cryptographic practices and protocols.

Best-known and developed application of quantum cryptography is QKD, which is the process of using quantum communication to establish a shared key between two parties without a third party learning anything about that key, even if Eve can eavesdrop on all communication between Alice and Bob.

Examples of tasks in mistrustful Quantum cryptography are commitment schemes and secure computations, the latter including the further examples of coin flipping and oblivious transfer.

In contrast to quantum key distribution where unconditional security can be achieved based only on the laws of quantum physics, in the case of various tasks in mistrustful cryptography there are no-go theorems showing that it is impossible to achieve unconditionally secure protocols based only on the laws of quantum physics.

Goal of position-based quantum cryptography is to use the geographical location of a player as its credential.

The need for post-quantum cryptography arises from the fact that many popular encryption and signature schemes can be broken using Shor's algorithm for factoring and computing discrete logarithms on a quantum computer.

In practice, quantum cryptography is only conditionally secure, dependent on a key set of assumptions.

FactSnippet · About · Terms · Privacy · Contact